Published in the Federal Register on February 13, 2013.      

36 CFR Part 1190\
\[Docket No. 2013-02\]\
RIN 3014-AA26

### Accessibility Guidelines for Pedestrian Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way; Shared Use Paths

**AGENCY:**  Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board.

**ACTION:**  Supplemental Notice of Proposed Rulemaking.

**SUMMARY:** We, the Architectural and Transportation Barriers
Compliance Board (Access Board), issued an advance notice of proposed
rulemaking (ANPRM) announcing our intent to develop accessibility
guidelines for shared used paths. Shared use paths are multi-use paths
designed primarily for use by bicyclists and pedestrians, including
pedestrians with disabilities, for transportation and recreation
purposes. Shared use paths are physically separated from motor vehicle
traffic by an open space or barrier, and are either within the highway
right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way. We noted in the
ANPRM that we are considering including accessibility guidelines for
shared use paths in the accessibility guidelines that we are developing
for sidewalks and other pedestrian facilities in the public
right-of-way. We subsequently issued a notice of proposed rulemaking
(NPRM) requesting comments on proposed accessibility guidelines for
pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way. The NPRM did not
include specific provisions for shared use paths. We are issuing this
supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking (SNPRM) to include specific
provisions for shared use paths in the proposed accessibility guidelines
for pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way. The proposed
accessibility guidelines would apply to the design, construction, and
alteration of pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way,
including shared use paths, covered by the Americans with Disabilities
Act and the Architectural Barriers Act, and would ensure that the
facilities are readily accessible to and usable by individuals with
disabilities.

**DATES:**  Submit comments by May 14, 2013.

**ADDRESSES:**  Submit comments by any of the following methods:

-   Federal eRulemaking Portal:
    [http://www.regulations.gov](http://www.regulations.gov/). Follow
    the instructions for submitting comments. Regulations.gov ID for
    this docket is ATBCB-2013-0002.
-   E-mail: [This email address is being protected from spambots. You
    need JavaScript enabled to view
    it.]{#cloak535428a8432b479288ee64c48046864e}
    . Include docket number ATBCB 2013-0002 in the subject line of the
    message.
-   Fax: 202-272-0081.
-   Mail or Hand Delivery/Courier: Scott Windley, Access Board, 1331 F
    Street, NW., Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20004-1111.

All comments received will be posted without change to
[http://www.regulations.gov](http://www.regulations.gov/), including any
personal information provided.

**FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:** Scott Windley, Access Board, 1331 F
Street NW., Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20004-1111. Telephone (202)
272-0025 (voice) or (202) 272-0028 (TTY). E-mail address [This email
address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to
view it.]{#cloak35a56f37ee6a0fdf98bbdd5c674ba73f}

.

**Supplementary Information:**

In this preamble, \"we,\" \"us,\" and \"our\" refer to the Architectural
and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board (Access Board).

[]{.clear}
