---
layout: post
title: U.S. Access Board Mourns Passing of Former Board Member Joseph Cirillo
date: 2026-06-05
excerpt: The U.S. Access Board mourns the passing of former Public Board Member Joseph A. Cirillo, who was appointed by President Bush in 2006 and served until 2010. Joe was a leader in the fields of architecture and accessibility in his home state of Rhode Island and around the nation . . .
image: /images/uploads/joe.jpg
image_alt_text: Joseph Cirillo headshot.
image_border: true
featured: false
---

The U.S. Access Board mourns the passing of former Public Board Member Joseph A. Cirillo, who was appointed by President Bush in 2006 and served until 2010. Joe was a leader in the fields of architecture and accessibility in his home state of Rhode Island and around the nation.

Joe began his career with positions at the Department of the Navy, C.A. Maguire Associates, Inc., and the Thomas Flatley Development Company. Later, in 1974, Joe was appointed as Rhode Island's first State Building Commissioner and served in that position for 28 years. During his tenure, he developed the law which provided for the adoption of the State Building Code in 1977. The code included the Commercial Building Code, 1 & 2 Family Dwelling Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, and Energy Code. Later specialty codes were added for accessibility, industrialized buildings, and rehabilitation.

During his retirement, Joe co-founded C & D Code Consultants, Inc., and was appointed to the U.S. Access Board by President George W. Bush. During his four years on the Board, Joe served on several committees and helped to advance accessibility for people with disabilities across the United States.

The Access Board remembers the irreplaceable contributions that Joseph Cirillo made to accessibility and sends its condolences to his wife Charlene and their family, friends, and colleagues.

[Read Joe’s full obituary](https://www.memorialfuneralhome.com/obituaries/joseph-cirillo) to learn more about his incredible life and career.
