---
layout: post
title: U.S. Access Board Holds Town Hall in Rhode Island, Attends Rhode Island Accessibility Summit
date: 2026-06-09
excerpt: Each year, the U.S. Access Board visits a city outside of Washington, D.C. to learn about the state of accessibility around the country. During the week of May 4th, the Access Board traveled to Rhode Island for its 2026 out-of-town Board meeting. On Tuesday, May 5th, the Board held its annual town hall meeting at Bally’s Event Center in Lincoln, RI, where it heard directly from residents regarding local accessibility concerns . . .
image: /images/uploads/Rhode-Island-Town-Hall-Audience.JPG
image_alt_text: The audience sits in attendance at the town hall.
image_border: true
featured: true
---

Each year, the U.S. Access Board visits a city outside of Washington, D.C. to learn about the state of accessibility around the country. During the week of May 4th, the Access Board traveled to Rhode Island for its 2026 out-of-town Board meeting. On Tuesday, May 5th, the Board held its annual town hall meeting at Bally’s Event Center in Lincoln, RI, where it heard directly from residents regarding local accessibility concerns. The event was immediately followed by the first annual [Rhode Island Accessibility Summit](https://www.rampisinclusion.org/accessibility-summit), which the Access Board attended as honored guests.

During the town hall, seven Presidentially appointed Public Board Members represented the agency, including Vice-Chair and Acting Chair of the Access Board, **Tina Guenette**. Representatives from the General Services Administration and the U.S. Departments of Commerce, Health and Human Services, Labor, Transportation, and Veterans Affairs were also in attendance. **Brett Smiley**, Mayor of Providence, RI, and **Dr. Silas Pinto**, Deputy Chief of People & Culture, City of Providence, RI, provided opening remarks at the session.

35 community members testified during the public comment portion of the town hall. Participants shared a range of accessibility concerns including, among others: accessible housing, medical facilities, and public rights-of-way, emergency planning, enforcement of the Americans with Disabilities Act, employment of people with disabilities, and risks associated with the use of artificial intelligence. The full town hall recording is archived on the [Board’s YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zwPK4t7d_Ts).

Following the town hall meeting, the Board attended the first annual Rhode Island Accessibility Summit, which was also held at Bally’s Event Center. The Summit was hosted by the organization [RAMP (Real Access Motivates Progress)](https://www.rampisinclusion.org/), which was founded by Ms. Guenette. In her capacity as CEO and President of RAMP, Ms. Guenette facilitated the various sessions held throughout the event.

The Rhode Island Accessibility Summit was the Ocean State's first accessibility summit and brought together leaders from the federal, state, local, and tribal levels. The event began with a roundtable between Lieutenant Governor **Sabina Matos**, the Access Board’s Executive Director **Dr. Sachin Pavithran**, Ms. Guenette, and other Access Board Members. During this session, Lt. Governor Matos discussed the importance of engaging the local community to stay on top of emerging issues and concerns within the Rhode Island disability community.

Following the roundtable, public officials from all levels of government reaffirmed their commitment to accessibility and spoke about the recent strides toward greater access that have been made in the state. Former Congressman James Langevin delivered the keynote address, which was followed by remarks from Rhode Island Secretary of State **Gregg Amore**, Rhode Island General Treasurer **James Diossa**, East Providence Mayor **Bob DaSilva**, Dr. Pavithran, and Congressman **Gabe Amo**. The Access Board was proud to attend the first annual Rhode Island Accessibility Summit and greatly looks forward to continued engagement with the disability community, as well as all community members, in the Ocean State.

The next meeting of the U.S. Access Board will take place in-person in Washington, DC from July 27 – 29, 2026. [Visit](https://www.access-board.gov/about/meetings.html) the Access Board’s website or [sign up](https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USACCESS/subscriber/qualify?commit=Subscribe&topic_id=USACCESS_1) for the free subscription to get notified of upcoming Board meetings, webinars, trainings, and other events.
