---
layout: post
title: U.S. Access Board Mourns Passing of Former Board Chair Pat Cannon
date: 2026-03-06
excerpt: The U.S. Access Board mourns the passing of former Public Board Member and Chair Patrick "Pat" Dale Cannon, who served on the Board from 1995 – 2003, and again from 2014 – 2022. Pat was a leader in accessibility and his efforts helped to transform the U.S. into a more accessible nation for millions of Americans with disabilities . . .
image: /images/uploads/patrick-cannon-east-lansing-mi-obituary.jpg
image_alt_text: Pat Cannon headshot.
featured: true
---

The U.S. Access Board mourns the passing of former Public Board Member and Chair Patrick "Pat" Dale Cannon, who served on the Board from 1995 – 2003, and again from 2014 – 2022. Pat was a leader in accessibility and his efforts helped to transform the U.S. into a more accessible nation for millions of Americans with disabilities.

Through his long career, Pat served in numerous roles that helped to advance access throughout society. He served as Executive Director of the Michigan Commission for the Blind and Executive Director of the Michigan Commission on Disability Concerns, and as Chair of both the Governor’s Committee on Disability and the President’s Committee on Disability. Additionally, Pat served as cabinet disability policy advisor to Michigan Governor Granholm and as Chair of Region 5 Great Lakes States in advancing the landmark Americans with Disabilities Act. On July 26, 1990, he stood alongside President Bush on the White House lawn for the signing of the bill into law.

In 1995, President Clinton appointed Pat to serve on the Access Board, where he remained until 2003. From 1997 – 1998, he served as Chair of the Board; fellow accessibility leader Judy Heumann served as his Vice-Chair during this term. Later, in 2014, President Obama appointed Pat to serve again on the Access Board, where he remained until 2022. Pat is one of the few Board Members to hold the distinction of serving non-consecutive terms.

Regarding his passing, Access Board Executive Director Sachin Pavithran remarked, “It was my great honor to serve with Pat in the Obama Administration at the Board. As a leader in the blindness field, Pat was a strong advocate for equal access for all blind people. My fellow Board Members and I benefited greatly from serving with one who had given so much to the disability community and to the advancement of accessibility in the United States. Pat will be missed and his legacy will be remembered for many years to come.”

The Access Board remembers the lifetime of service that Pat Cannon gave to his state, country, and the disability community and sends its condolences to his wife Janeile and their entire family.
