## Goal #4: Promote Accessibility throughout Society

The Access Board's fourth strategic goal is supported by two objectives, which are:

- Objective 4.1: Identify and address inequities in accessibility faced by underserved communities.
- Objective 4.2: Identify and work to address barriers to accessibility beyond those covered by our guidelines and standards.

### Background

Under its statutory authority, the Access Board promotes accessibility throughout all segments of society.  This work includes various activities, including, but not limited to, interacting with members of the public; holding in-person and virtual public events, such as town hall meetings, listening sessions, among others; speaking at national and international conferences; meeting with national organizations and international delegates and officials; and delivering information via its public communication channels to a wide range of stakeholders and audiences.  In FY 2024, the agency continued applying various strategies and activities to ensure that greater awareness of accessibility permeates parts of society and to listen to and collect information and comments from people with disabilities, those who serve people with disabilities, and those whose work relates to implementing accessible design.

### Summary of Key Accomplishments in FY 2024

#### Public Events and Engagement

Under the agency’s bylaws, as revised in November 2022, the Access Board holds four Board Meetings per year, one of which is usually outside the Washington, D.C. area.  In general, two of the four meetings are in- person, and the other two are conducted remotely. Board Meetings are typically held over two or three days that include both informal (i.e., closed to the public) sessions and formal (i.e., open to the public) sessions.  Some of the sessions often serve as opportunities for Board Members and staff to strategize ways to accomplish Goal #4 and to hold in-person and virtual public events to gather information on accessible design and accessibility barriers and engage with members of the public and organizations.

During FY 2024, the Governing Board met in October 2023, and in January, April, and July 2024. In October and January, the formal sessions were open to the public through live web streams.  In April, the Access Board held a town hall meeting in Los Angeles, CA for members of the public to join in person and provide public comments on the state of accessibility in the local community.  At the July meeting, the formal session was hybrid for members of the public, with in-person attendance at the Access Board’s office building. Archival video recordings of formal sessions of Board Meetings are also posted on the Access Board’s [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC5tRWTtV5eSw68N3tSpmyWw) and website.

During the April Board meeting in Los Angeles, a series of meetings were held to better understand the state of accessibility in the region and within the entertainment industry. The Board spent an entire day in meetings with representatives of the entertainment industry to understand the accessibility challenges faced by working professionals with disabilities in the industry, as well as the progress that is being made to make productions more accessible. The Board’s meetings were hosted at the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which has been embarking on its own accessibility efforts. In roundtables, the Board learned from creatives (actors, writers, directors, and musicians) with disabilities.  The Access Board learned about authentic casting practices and writers with disabilities telling authentic stories, along with accessibility issues with trailers, sets and locations, wardrobe and make-up areas, and employment-related websites. The Access Board also learned from studio, network, and streamer representatives regarding efforts to improve the accessibility of productions and representation of individuals with disabilities, the building of strategic alliances with disability-led organizations, and the use of AI in audio descriptions.

Additionally, while in Los Angeles, the Access Board visited Nickelodeon and Netflix. At Nickelodeon, the Board learned about the studio’s disability inclusion efforts and work towards greater accessibility for their workforce and visitors. At Netflix, the Board viewed a demonstration of open audio description and captions and spoke with staff regarding the process of developing these accessibility features. Additionally, the Board met with Disability Rights California (DRC), an advocacy organization for Californians with disabilities. DRC representatives described myriad accessibility challenges currently being addressed in California, including housing accessibility, transportation issues, and accessible voting.

The Board also participated in a series of conversations with City of Los Angeles officials, organized in collaboration with the city’s [Department on Disability](https://disability.lacity.gov/) and hosted at the Loyola Law School’s Coelho Center for Disability Law, Policy and Innovation. Former United States Representative Tony Coelho, one of the primary sponsors of the ADA, began the day with comments highlighting the progress that has been made to advance accessibility and the opportunities for improvement that remain. Following the meeting, the Board participated in a site visit with city, LA Metro, and LA28 representatives at the Los Angeles Convention Center Olympic and Paralympic venue and the planned Pico Station transportation hub to better understand the accessibility issues that are to be addressed before the 2028 Summer Games.

The Board held its annual town hall meeting at The California Endowment, where it heard directly from Los Angeles residents regarding local accessibility concerns. Eight presidentially appointed Public Members represented the Board, as well as Federal Member and Board Vice-Chair Katy Kale, Deputy Administrator of GSA, and Federal Member Taryn Williams, Assistant Secretary of Labor for Disability Employment Policy at DOL. Representatives from the Departments of Commerce, Education, Housing and Urban Development, and Veterans Affairs were also present. Brenda Shockley, Deputy Mayor of Economic Opportunity for the City of Los Angeles, provided opening remarks.

150 individuals attended the in-person town hall meeting; over 30 community members testified during the public comment portion of the town hall. Participants shared a range of concerns including, among others, accessibility of pedestrian facilities in the public-right-of-way (sidewalks, curb ramps, railroad crossings, bike lanes); transportation challenges; accessibility of the 2028 Olympic and Paralympic Games; digital accessibility; accessibility of historic buildings; access for individuals who are hard of hearing; accessibility of casinos; and issues related to electromagnetic sensitivities. After the town hall meeting, the Access Board held a networking event to provide opportunities for members of the public to further interact and engage with Board Members and staff. This activity supported Objective 4.1, whereby Board Members and staff sought to better understand accessibility inequities, including those in underserved communities. The Access Board will consider this information as it strategizes on how its services and programs may serve the public beyond rulemaking, thus supporting Objective 4.2.

At the end of FY 2024, Board staff began preparation for the July 2025 Board Meeting in New Orleans. This Board Meeting will primarily focus on accessibility and discrimination in transportation, temporary event spaces, and the public-rights-of-way. In September 2024, some Board staff traveled to New Orleans to meet with a range of stakeholders: disability organizations; residents and tourism advocates; City of New Orleans government officials; multi-tourism planning organizations. These meetings provided opportunities for the Access Board to listen to stakeholders and learn more about accessibility barriers, challenges, and accessibility initiatives by the city and local tourism groups, accessible public transportation in New Orleans, accessibility and event planning for the 2025 Super Bowl, and long-standing tourism events in New Orleans and plans for implementing the final guidelines for public right-of-way and shared use paths in the City of New Orleans. The week-long meetings with stakeholders support Objective 4.1 and 4.2, and the July 2025 Board Meeting will continue in achieving these objectives through engagement with stakeholders in roundtables, panel presentations, discussions, site tours, and demonstrations.

At the July Board meeting, the Board voted for the 2026 out-of-town meeting and town hall to take place in Providence, Rhode Island. Possible events and meetings include a panel discussion on beach and outdoor area accessibility; an accessible art experience and panel discussion on disability in the arts at The Steel Yard; a visit to a state veterans’ home and discussion with veterans with disabilities; an “accessibility walk” to view accessibility issues and solutions in the public right-of-way; a visit to a cafe designed to be used by employees with disabilities; and a meeting with state officials to understand efforts to improve accessibility in Rhode Island. The 2026 out-of-town meeting and town hall will support Objective 4.1 and 4.2.

#### Executive Order on Artificial Intelligence

In the first quarter of FY 2024, President Biden issued EO 14110 Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Development and Use of Artificial Intelligence, in which the Access Board was tasked with several actions to address equity and accessibility. During FY 2024 Q2-Q3 in support of the EO, the Board signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the American Association of People with Disabilities (AAPD) and the Center for Democracy & Technology (CDT) to ensure that the disability community is engaged and supported through education and resources related to AI.

A key element of the MOU included hosting an informative and collaborative AI series entitled, “Developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) Equity, Access & Inclusion for All Series”. As part of this series, the Access Board held public hearings with members of the disability community, federal agency AI leaders, academics, and AI practitioners to learn about the risks and benefits of AI. In total, three virtual hearing sessions took place: two for the disability community (on August 8, 2024), and one for federal agency and AI industry practitioners (on August 22, 2024). Real time captioning and sign language interpreting were provided for all hearings.

Information gained from the hearings was consolidated into a summary draft document at the end of FY 2024. Analysis and additional resources will be developed into a report with recommendations for publication during FY 2025.

#### Presentations

To further achieve Objectives 4.1 and 4.2, Board staff also provided presentations and engaged with stakeholders outside the context of Board meetings and other public agency events. Board staff were featured speakers or panelists at both government and industry conferences, forums, symposiums, and other public events to discuss accessible design and accessibility. Examples include, but are not limited to, the 2023 Interagency Accessibility Forum (IAAF), M-Enabling Summit, Mid-Atlantic ADA Conference, ADA National Network Directors Meeting, and California State University, Northridge (CSUN) Annual Assistive Technology Conference. These presentations span a range of topics in both the built environment and Section 508 and reached thousands of attendees.

The Board celebrated Disability Pride and the anniversary of the ADA by attending the White House Celebration in September. Current and former Board Members joined the Access Board’s Executive Director and Public Affairs Specialist for this momentous event recognizing the progress for Americans with disabilities throughout the Biden-Harris Administration.

Access Board staff attended the White House Disability Pride Month Convening in July. At the event, the Board’s Executive Director spoke on the importance of equity and the role that it plays in increasing accessibility. He also spoke about the purpose of the ADA and PROWAG, the latter of which was published on August 8, 2023.
The Board celebrated Global Accessibility Awareness Day (GAAD) by attending the White House Global Accessibility Awareness Day Convening in May. Board staff joined federal and disability leaders to discuss the work being done toward greater digital access and inclusion. The Board’s Executive Director spoke on the importance of accessible information and communication technology.

Access Board staff attended the White House Convening on Equity in February. At the event, the Board’s Executive Director spoke on the role that equity plays in increasing accessibility. He also spoke about the purpose of the ADA, ABA, and PROWAG.
Access Board staff also attended the White House Convening on Protecting the Safety, Rights, and Dignity of Air Travelers with Disabilities in February. While there, staff had the opportunity to speak with Secretary of Transportation Pete Buttigieg and Senator Tammy Duckworth on the importance of accessible air travel.

In July, Board staff presented at the 2024 Esri User Conference in San Diego, CA on the work of the Board and the technical assistance provided by the Board that has advanced accessibility for geographical information system (GIS) mapping. Staff also explained how users can leverage the resources of the Access Board in their approaches to accessible GIS use. The conference was attended by over 25,000 GIS professionals from around the world. 

Also in July, the Access Board’s Public Affairs Specialist provided remarks at the flag raising to kick off Pride Month in Philadelphia alongside city and state officials. She amplified the Board’s mission and encouraged attendees to engage with the Board’s resources.

In June, Board staff attended the National ADA Symposium in Minneapolis, MN and presented alongside retired Senior Accessibility Specialist Bill Botten. While there, Board staff attended numerous sessions and learned from peers in the accessibility field. 

Also in June, Board staff attended an open house at the new national headquarters of Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA). During this attendance, Access Board staff had the opportunity to tour the accessible space and speak with veterans’ health advocates. 
In August, Access Board technical staff provided a PROWAG Overview and Discussion for the American Public Works Association (APWA) Big Cities and Counties Forum held in Washington, DC. More than a dozen cities and counties were represented, furthering the understanding of PROWAG at the state and local levels. 
Access Board staff attended and provided resources at several community events in FY 2024, including the annual Disability Resource and Employment Fair hosted by Loudoun County, VA, which provides community members with disabilities the opportunity to learn about employment options, services, and other resources that are offered by government agencies, non-profits, and local organizations.

Board technical staff partnered and engaged with a wide array of federal agencies, including representatives from the National Park Service (NPS), Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), DOT’s Office of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Federal Transit Administration, the Federal Highway Administration, DOL’s Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), DOJ, HHS, and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). In addition, Board staff maintained partnerships and collaborations with Amtrak, state and local departments of transportation, and codes and standards organization officials, from such organizations as Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North America (RESNA), International Code Council (ICC), and American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 

Board staff collaborated with GSA on updates to the accessible social media guidance on Section508.gov. These efforts were led by utilizing the Board's current social media strategies.

Throughout FY 2024, Board staff also engaged with the Coalition of Mayor’s Offices for People with Disabilities to share the Access Board resources, rulemaking updates, and to connect at the local level nationally. This coalition represents cities from across the nation including New York City, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Boston, Salt Lake City, and 15 additional cities. In August, a PROWAG Overview and Q&A session was hosted between Board technical staff and the Coalition to engage in understanding and dialogue on PROWAG at the city level.

These presentations and collaborations achieve Objectives 4.1 and 4.2 by providing engagements with stakeholders outside the context of Board meetings and other public agency events.

#### Notable Meetings

Objectives 4.1 and 4.2 were developed for alignment with EOs 13175 *Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships*, 13985 *Advancing Racial Equity and Support for Underserved Communities Through the Federal Government*, and 14035 *Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility in the Federal Workforce*.  The agency has worked toward achieving the mission of EO 13175 by meeting with other federal agencies, such as the Administration for Community Living (ACL) and IHS to discuss the Access Board’s services and programs and strategize ways to build and improve relationships with tribal communities and employees.  In continuing to achieve Objective 4.1, during FY 2024 the Access Board sought out opportunities to connect with federal agencies focused on serving tribal nations and to establish relationships with tribal communities. Efforts included Board staff participating in the Removing Barriers to Accessing Services in Tribal Communities forum hosted by the SSA and the National Disability Forum (NDF).

Pursuant of EOs 13175 and 13985, Board staff continues to collaborate with ACL on the Older Americans Act Title VI grant program that provides nutrition and other support to elders on tribal lands. ACL staff have identified disability access to ceremonial spaces as a key quality of life issue for older tribal members. The National Congress of American Indians passed a resolution in 2023 encouraging tribes to enhance accessibility of ceremonial spaces and naming the Access Board as a resource for technical assistance. Six collaborative meetings with ACL were held in FY 2024. Board technical staff continue to engage in understanding the range of accessibility barriers presenting in these spaces so that the Access Board can provide appropriate technical assistance upon request. These meetings included virtual and in-person observations of ceremonial spaces. The Board is also working with ACL staff toward providing technical assistance for accessibility of Title VI program offices and connections to additional resources.

In continuing to achieve Objective 4.1 and in alignment with EO 14035 Diversity, Equity, Inclusion, and Accessibility in the Federal Workforce, several meetings took place in FY 2024. Notably, in July, Board staff attended a series of panel discussions dedicated to elevating the voices and experiences of South Asian Americans in the federal government at the White House. The Access Board’s Executive Director spoke about his own experiences and had the opportunity to speak with South Asian American emerging professionals in the civil service.

In FY 2024, the Access Board convened with international representatives from the Department of State’s International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP), a premier professional exchange program that brings together foreign leaders and American counterparts to engage on emerging issues, policy goals, and shared interests. These meetings involved IVLP groups with representatives from Germany and Indonesia to discuss federal laws and standards, the rulemaking process, digital design accessibility, and promoting access for all.

The Access Board met with delegation members from the German Federal Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs, including Annette Tabbara, Undersecretary for People with Disabilities, to discuss accessibility regulatory processes, enforcement, and how to ensure accessible access to all areas of public life, including employment for people with disabilities in Germany and the United States. Moreover, through IVLP, the Access Board met with eight delegation members from Indonesia at the agency’s office. The discussion focused on the Board’s rulemaking processes, digital design, and ways to ensure that people with disabilities have access to government programs globally. The meeting provided insights into the challenges, but also successes, of accessibility related rulemaking cross-culturally.

The annual ZeroCon24 was held in Vienna, Austria with more than 100 countries represented, and was focused on ICT accessibility. Board staff presented highlights on the Access Board’s standards work as a panelist on the Accessible European Union efforts and facilitated a panel of five model innovative technology solutions that enhance sign language communication access in Brazil, India, Japan, and Malawi.

During FY 2024, Board technical staff also continued participating in the European eAccessibility working group to assist in developing a European standard to make ICT products and services accessible. Additionally, Board technical staff participated as a panelist for Accessible Canada – Accessible World (ACAW), an international conference on accessibility. The panel was a plenary session on the International Collaboration on Accessibility Standardization, and Board staff spoke about several of the Access Board’s standards.

Also in FY 2024, the Board staff presented at the Korero for Change Transport webinar, which was hosted by Access Matters Aotearoa Trust of New Zealand. During the presentation, Board staff discussed the work of the Access Board specifically as it relates to accessible transportation.

The Executive Director and OTIS Director served as official members of the Department of State delegation to the United Nations in FY 2024 for the United Nations Conference on the States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (COSP17).  Collectively, they participated in multiple engagements reaching dozens of country delegates, including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), C5+1, and accessibility partners from Kenya, Austria, Japan, Israel, and Google. The Board’s international engagements help support Objectives 4.1 and 4.2.

#### Public Communication

The Access Board has several external communication channels to provide information on accessibility guidelines and standards, services and programs, news updates, and accessible design resources.  These channels provide possibilities for underserved communities to be informed and supported in redressing inequities throughout society (Objective 4.1) and for all members of the public to understand barriers to accessibility beyond the Access Board's guidelines and standards (Objective 4.2).

The Access Board provides a [free e-subscription](https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/usaccess/subscriber/new) to members of the public who can sign up for one or more of the agency’s seven topic areas: News; Buildings and Sites; Health Care; Information and Communication Technology; Recreation and Outdoor Areas; Streets and Sidewalks; and Transportation.  In FY 2024, the Access Board sent 92 e-bulletins to its subscribers.  This is a decrease in the number of bulletins issued in compassion with FY 2023 by 32%. However, the total number of subscribers and subscriptions increased in FY 2024 when compared to FY 2023, with a total of 83,316 subscribers (an increase of 22.50%) and 267,899 subscriptions (an increase of 24.10%). This is demonstrative of the public affairs program’s focus on intentional and effective communication over numerical publications.  At the end of FY 2023, the public affairs program also developed new, modernized promotional materials, including fact sheets, infographics, and three short videos. The topics of the videos include: (1) introductory information about the agency; (2) the ABA enforcement and compliance program; and (3) the agency’s technical services and programs. These materials were distributed to the agency’s e-subscribers, as well as other various stakeholders and audiences, throughout FY 2024.

The Access Board’s website continued to serve as a crucial resource on accessibility guidelines and standards, guidance materials, ABA complaint methods, and news about agency activities and events. In FY 2024, the website logged around 1.2 million users (19% increase from FY 2023) and 3.5 million page views (25% increase from FY 2023).

In FY 2024, the work of the Board was also featured by several media outlets, including Government and Technology’s feature article on the Board’s Developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) Equity, Access & Inclusion for All Series. Additionally, the Board’s Senior ICT Accessibility Specialist was a guest on the [ADA Shop Talk Podcast](https://adashoptalk.podbean.com/e/section-508-of-the-rehabilitation-act-with-kathrine-eng-senior-ict-accessibility-specialist-us-access-board/) with Paul Klien; topics included Section 508 and the Rehabilitation Act itself. The podcast has a large following and focuses on accessibility.  The Access Board’s episode is the third most downloaded episode for the podcast.

In FY 2024, the Access Board implemented public information strategies and tactics on its social media platforms (Twitter/X, LinkedIn, Facebook, and YouTube) to increase greater public awareness of the agency and its services, programs, events, and activities, especially among underserved communities. On Twitter/X, the Access Board gained nearly 300 new followers, bringing the follower total to 2,930. On LinkedIn, the Board increased its followers by 40%, bringing the total LinkedIn followers to 4,954. On Facebook, the Board increased its followers by 53%, bringing the total Facebook followers to 1,148; the Board’s Facebook activity also increased content interactions by 116%. The Access Board’s YouTube channel had over 56,000 views of its 50 videos (including 3 shorts) and over 600 new subscribers. Currently, the agency’s YouTube channel has a total of 434,459 views and about 4,356 subscribers.

Furthermore, following discussions at the July 2024 Board meeting, a Board Communication Strategy was launched that included steps to ensure that all Board Members are aware of the ongoing and upcoming events, news, and resources.  Board Members have been encouraged to sign up for all Board email updates and to follow the Board on its social media platforms to amplify the reach of existing communication efforts. In September, the first edition of the Board Member Highlights newsletter was sent to all Board Members.
