## Goal #4: Promote Accessibility throughout Society

The Access Board's fourth strategic goal is supported by two objectives, which are:

- Objective 4.1: Identify and address inequities in accessibility faced by underserved communities.
- Objective 4.2: Identify and work to address barriers to accessibility beyond those covered by our guidelines and standards.

### Background

The United States is a world leader in accessibility for people with disabilities. As the federal agency statutorily tasked with promoting accessibility throughout all segments of society, the Access Board works extensively to bring awareness to accessibility laws and regulations, and to highlight opportunities to enhance the quality of life for individuals with disabilities through the implementation of accessible design. This work includes activities such as holding in-person and virtual public events (town hall meetings and listening sessions, among others); speaking at national and international conferences; meeting with national organizations and international delegates and officials; and delivering information via its public communication channels to a wide range of stakeholders and audiences. 

In FY 2025, the Access Board continued applying various strategies and activities to ensure that greater awareness of accessibility permeates parts of society; the Board also continued to listen to and collect data and comments from people with disabilities, those who serve people with disabilities, and those whose work relates to implementing accessible design. 

### Summary of Key Accomplishments in FY 2025

#### Public Events and Engagement

During FY 2025, the Governing Board met in October 2024, and in April and July 2025. During all three meetings, the formal sessions were open to the public through live web streams. During the formal session in July, the Access Board held a town hall meeting in New Orleans, LA for members of the public to join in person and provide public comments on the state of accessibility in the local community. At the April meeting, the formal session was hybrid for members of the public, with in-person attendance at the Access Board’s office building. Archival video recordings of formal sessions of Board meetings are also posted on the Access Board’s [YouTube channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UC5tRWTtV5eSw68N3tSpmyWw) and website. 

During the July 2025 Board meeting in New Orleans, the Board held a series of engagements to better understand the state of accessibility in the city and the region, and to provide resources to the local community. Board Members and staff attended several meetings with local advocates and officials from the State of Louisiana and the City of New Orleans, held at the Louisiana State University (LSU) Health Sciences Center New Orleans. The Board engaged with participants about the state of accessibility across Louisiana from the Governor’s Office, LA Developmental Disabilities Council (LaDDC), Disability Rights LA, and LSU Health’s Human Development Center. The Board also met with several city leaders who implement accessibility under the Americans with Disabilities Act for New Orleans residents with disabilities, as well as city leaders from the Department of Public Works who are working to address the accessibility of pedestrian facilities throughout the city. 

While in New Orleans, the Board held its annual town hall meeting, where it heard directly from New Orleans residents regarding local accessibility concerns. The event was held concurrently with the National Federation of the Blind (NFB) National Convention, which allowed Access Board Members to also hear about accessibility concerns from people who are blind or have low vision from around the country. During the event, 10 Public Board Members represented the agency, including the Chair of the Access Board, Elver Ariza-Silva. Representatives from the U.S. Departments of Health and Human Services and Veterans Affairs were also in attendance, as well as state and local officials including New Orleans Mayor LaToya Cantrell. Over 20 attendees testified during the public comment portion of the town hall, sharing a range of accessibility concerns including, among others: public transportation, pedestrian facilities in the public right-of-way, self-service transaction machines, Section 508 enforcement, design for people who are neurodivergent, air travel, voting, maps, and braille signage. After the town hall meeting, the Access Board held a networking event to provide opportunities for members of the public to further engage with Board Members and staff. This activity supported Objective 4.1, whereby the agency sought to better understand accessibility inequities, including those in underserved communities. The Access Board will consider this information as it strategizes how its services and programs may serve the public beyond rulemaking, thus supporting Objective 4.2.

During its visit to New Orleans, the Board also focused on engaging with local leaders regarding accessible public transportation. To achieve this goal, the Board met with leadership from the New Orleans Regional Transit Authority (RTA). During these meetings, the Board and RTA staff observed the accessibility of two public transit systems in the city: (1) the public ferry boat that connects the New Orleans metropolitan area across the Mississippi River, and; (2) the Canal Streetcar Line. In addition, the Board met with local National Park Service leadership from Jean Lafitte National Historical Site and Preserve and New Orleans Jazz National Historical Park to provide resources for increasing accessibility for park visitors with disabilities. Finally, the Board also met with local accessibility advocates and residents with disabilities and heard from city officials and contractors about their efforts to make New Orleans more accessible to tourists with disabilities. The Access Board will continue to offer technical assistance, training, and other resources to state and local leaders as they strive to advance accessibility for Louisianians. 

Throughout much of FY 2025, Board staff began preparation for the May 2026 Board meeting in Providence, RI. In September 2025, some Board staff traveled to Rhode Island to meet with local leaders, disability organizations, community members, and other stakeholders. These meetings included an accessibility observation of a ferry, a visit to a state veterans’ home, roundtables with community leaders and people with disabilities, and various other meetings with tourism industry personnel, local artists, and local and state government leaders, including the lieutenant governor. These week-long meetings with stakeholders supported Objectives 4.1 and 4.2, and the May 2026 Board meeting will continue in achieving these objectives through engagement with stakeholders in roundtables, panel presentations, discussions, site tours, and demonstrations. At the April 2025 Board meeting, the Board voted for the 2027 out-of-town meeting and town hall to take place in Nashville, TN; this Board meeting will also support Objectives 4.1 and 4.2. 

#### Executive Order on Artificial Intelligence

In the first quarter of FY 2025, the Access Board summarized its findings from a series of FY 2024 informative and collaborative AI sessions entitled: “Developing Artificial Intelligence (AI) Equity, Access & Inclusion for All Series”. As part of this series, the Access Board held public hearings with members of the disability community, federal agency AI leaders, academics, and the AI industry to learn about the risks and benefits of the technology. In total, three virtual hearing sessions took place: two for the disability community (on August 8, 2024) and one for federal agency and AI industry practitioners (on August 22, 2024). Information gained from the hearings was consolidated into a summary and presented to the public via a webinar in January 2025. 

#### Presentations 

To further achieve Objectives 4.1 and 4.2, Board staff also provided presentations and engaged with stakeholders outside the context of Board meetings and other public agency events. Board staff were featured speakers or panelists at both government and industry conferences, forums, symposiums, and other public events to discuss accessible design and accessibility. Examples include, but are not limited to, the Interagency Accessibility Forum (IAAF), M-Enabling Summit, National ADA Summit, and ADA National Network Directors Meeting. These presentations span a range of topics in both the built environment and Section 508 and reached thousands of attendees. 

In October 2024, several Access Board staff attended and presented at the 2024 M-Enabling Summit held in Alexandria, VA. Additionally, Executive Director Sachin Pavithran facilitated a panel discussion on Title II of the ADA for federal, state, and local governments alongside staff from the Department of Justice, General Services Administration, State of Minnesota, and National Association of Counties. 

Also in October 2024, Board staff were invited to provide trainings on PROWAG for the American Society of Landscape Architects Annual Conference, the City of San Marcos, Texas, and the City of Long Beach, California. Trainings were also completed on accessibility and artificial intelligence at the Annual U.S. Conference on Disability, on ADA accessibility for transportation vehicles and the Passenger Vessel Accessibility Guidelines for Access Matters New Zealand, and on electric vehicle charging for the Accessible Mobility Collaborative Summit. Board staff were also invited to present two trainings at the Certified Access Specialist Institute (CASI) Summit on accessibility and non-standard short-term lodging and accessible long-term care and social services. Along with the conference presentations, Board staff were invited to provide a two-day overview on the ABA for the Social Security Administration, and a 60-minute overview of the ABA and accessibility in federal facilities for the Army Research Laboratories. The month ended with two final presentations on accessibility and artificial intelligence at the Council of State Administrators of Vocational Rehabilitation Fall Conference. The Access Board webinar scheduled and completed in October 2024 included a built environment webinar on a review of the requirements in the ADA and the ABA for alterations. 

In November 2024, Board staff were invited to co-present with GSA on three topics --- Section 508 exceptions, PDFs and document accessibility, and social media accessibility --- at the Interagency Accessibility Forum. Board staff were also invited to provide training on the Public Right-of-Way Accessibility Guidelines for the National Association of ADA Coordinators. Access Board webinars scheduled and completed in November 2024 included a built environment webinar on accessibility of spa resorts and a 508 best practices webinar on essential strategies for creating accessible social media content. The two aforementioned social media presentations were based upon the updated [accessible social media webpage](https://www.section508.gov/create/social-media/) on Section508.gov; the content on this page was based upon the Board’s current social media strategies and was a collaboration between the Access Board and GSA. 

In December 2024, Board staff provided virtual training for the 1,100 business members of New Orleans & Company with a focus on public rights-of-way to support accessibility efforts as New Orleans prepared for the upcoming Super Bowl. The session included an overview of the Access Board and an invitation to attendees to the agency’s July 9, 2025, town hall in the city. Board staff were also invited to present a webinar on the Voluntary Product Accessibility Template (VPAT) and Accessibility Conformance Report (ACR) for the Department of Defense. The Access Board webinar scheduled and completed in December 2024 included a built environment webinar on accessible bus and van transportation. 

In January 2025, Board staff were invited to be a part of a panel presentation on the ADA at the Accessibility Professionals Association Conference. Along with the panel presentation, a collaborative presentation on ADA requirements and the FHA was also completed. Access Board webinars scheduled in January 2025 included a built environment webinar on accessibility and the role of the Access Board (postponed due to the observance of former President Jimmy Carter’s funeral service) and a 508 best practices webinar on highlights from the FY 2024 Government-wide Section 508 Assessment. 

In February 2025, the scheduled Access Board webinar on accessible airport terminals was cancelled due to policy changes impacting the external federal agency speaker’s participation. 

In March 2025, Board staff attended and presented at the 2025 National Title VI Training & Technical Assistance Conference. Sessions included discussions of caregiving for older Native Americans with disabilities, resources for older Native Americans, nutritional programs, fiscal training, and more. Board staff were provided with multiple presentation offers: (1) an invitation from the Access Association UK to provide a presentation focusing on designing for children at the Access Association virtual Spring 2025 Seminar; (2) an invitation from the City of Baltimore to provide an introductory training on the ADA and PROWAG; (3) an invitation from the Tennessee Department of Transportation to provide a virtual training on PROWAG, and; (4) an invitation to provide a training on the ABA Accessibility Standards and federal leased facilities for the Federal Aviation Administration. Access Board webinars scheduled in March 2025 included a built environment webinar on accessible means of egress and a 508 best practices webinar on training agency contracting teams on 508 compliances (cancelled due to policy changes impacting the external federal agency speaker’s participation). 

In April 2025, Board staff attended the Equity in Motion Summit and presented on accessible design in the public right-of-way and provided training to the Bureau of Land Management on the ADA and ABA Accessibility Standards. The Access Board webinar scheduled and completed in April 2025 included a built environment webinar on exhibition design and accessibility for visitors with disabilities. 

In May 2025, Board staff presented at three events: (1) the “born-accessible design for digital accessibility” workshop at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Studies at Harvard University; (2) a co-presentation on international accessibility laws at the Interagency Accessibility Forum, and; (3) a panel discussion on website and document accessibility with PlayCore. Access Board webinars scheduled and completed in May 2025 included a built environment webinar on outdoor dining, retail, and community spaces and a 508 best practices webinar on the NPS media player—an accessible option for government agencies. 

In June 2025, Board staff attended the National ADA Symposium in Atlanta, GA and presented a total of four training courses on creating an accessible built environment. Board staff presented three 90-minute training courses on topics including accessible travel, accessible outdoor developed areas, and common accessibility mistakes. Board staff were also invited to provide a three-hour workshop covering an overview of the ADA Accessibility Standards. While there, Board staff also attended several sessions and learned from peers in the accessibility field. Also in June, Board staff were invited to provide an ABA overview training for GSA, provide two virtual trainings—accessibility of residential facilities and transient lodging facilities—for the Hawaii State Department of Health Disability Access Conference, and participate in an ADA immersive experience with the Institute of Transportation Engineers. The latter session included a walk around with transportation practitioners to discuss challenges navigating the built environment. Board staff also presented at the United Nations Conference of State Parties annual event on accessibility and artificial intelligence. The Access Board webinar scheduled and completed in June 2025 included a built environment webinar on accessibility and historic buildings and facilities. 

In July 2025, Board staff were invited to present three trainings at the National Federation of the Blind National Convention including an overview of the ABA, a training on accessible ICT, and a training on PROWAG. Board staff also provided trainings on PROWAG for the Louisiana State Department of Transportation, Jefferson Parish Transit, New Orleans Department of Public Works, New Orleans Regional Transit Authority, Wisconsin ADA Coordinators Association, and DC Department of Transportation. Later in July, Board staff were invited to provide training to Amtrak related to accessibility and the Amtrak customer experience and separately, to present a training on the accessibility standards for medical diagnostic equipment for Access Israel’s 15th International Webinar on Advancing Accessibility in Health. Board staff also presented at the National Council on Independent Living (NCIL) conference on artificial intelligence and disability innovation. Access Board webinars scheduled and completed in July 2025 included a built environment webinar on accessibility and the role of the Access Board and a 508 best practices webinar on PDFs and document accessibility. 

In August 2025, the Access Board completed a built environment series webinar on accessible polling places and election-supporting technology.

In September 2025, Board staff were invited to present on the ADA Accessibility Standards at the Accessibility Professionals Association Virtual Fall Conference and on shared use paths at the Pennsylvania Greenways and Trails Summit. Board staff were also invited to provide training at the National Park Service Superintendent’s meeting on the ABA and historic national cemeteries. To close out the fiscal year, Board staff were invited to provide a training at the National Indian Council on Aging (NICOA) American Indian Elders Conference on accessibility best practices for Title VI program centers and ceremonial spaces. The Access Board webinars scheduled and completed in September 2025 included a built environment webinar on the ABA and leased federal buildings and facilities and a 508 best practices webinar on global accessibility laws. 

Throughout FY 2025, Board technical staff partnered and engaged with a wide array of federal agencies, including representatives from the National Park Service, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), Department of Transportation’s Office of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Federal Transit Administration, Federal Highway Administration, Department of Labor’s Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP), Department of Justice, Department of Health and Human Services, Food and Drug Administration (FDA), and Architect of the Capitol (AOC). In addition, Board staff maintained partnerships and collaborations with Amtrak, state and local departments of transportation, and codes and standards organization officials, including, but not limited to the Rehabilitation Engineering Society of North America (RESNA), International Code Council (ICC), and American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM). 

Throughout FY 2025, Board staff also engaged with the Coalition of Mayor’s Offices for People with Disabilities to share Access Board resources, rulemaking updates, and to connect at the local level nationally. This coalition represents cities from across the nation including New York City, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, Boston, Salt Lake City, and 15 additional cities. 

These presentations and collaborations achieve Objectives 4.1 and 4.2 by providing engagements with stakeholders outside the context of Board meetings and other public agency events. 

#### Notable Meetings 

Objectives 4.1 and 4.2 were developed for alignment with several Executive Orders, including EO 13175 “Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships.” The agency has worked toward achieving the mission of EO 13175 by meeting with other federal agencies, such as the Administration for Community Living (ACL) and Indian Health Service (IHS) to discuss the Access Board’s services and programs and strategize ways to build and improve relationships with tribal communities and employees. In continuing to achieve Objective 4.1, during FY 2025 the Access Board sought out opportunities to connect with federal agencies focused on serving tribal nations and to establish relationships with tribal communities. Notably, in November 2025, Board staff attended the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) Traditional Healing Summit both virtually and in person. A roundtable session was held between tribal leaders, ACL leadership, and Board staff to discuss accessibility needs and potential collaborative solutions. 

Pursuant of EO 13175, Board staff continues to collaborate with ACL on the Older Americans Act Title VI grant program that provides nutrition and other support to elders on tribal lands. ACL staff have identified disability access to ceremonial spaces as a key quality of life issue for older tribal members. The National Congress of American Indians (NCAI) passed a resolution in 2023 encouraging tribes to enhance accessibility of ceremonial spaces and naming the Access Board as a resource for technical assistance. Board technical staff continue to attend meetings to better understand the range of accessibility barriers presented in these spaces so that the Access Board can provide appropriate technical assistance upon request. These meetings include virtual and in-person observations of ceremonial spaces. The Board is also working with ACL staff toward providing technical assistance for accessibility of Title VI program offices and connections to additional resources. 

In FY 2025, the Access Board convened with international representatives from the Department of State’s International Visitor Leadership Program (IVLP), a premier professional exchange program that brings together foreign leaders and American counterparts to engage on emerging issues, policy goals, and shared interests. In November 2024, Board staff met with a delegation from Indonesia, and in December, met with a delegation from the Central African Republic. Both discussions focused on the Board’s rulemaking processes, public engagement, and ways to ensure that people with disabilities have access to government facilities. In May 2025, the Board again welcomed a delegation from Oman as part of IVLP. The conversation focused on the role of the ADA, the Architectural Barriers Act, and Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, and their corresponding accessibility guidelines and standards. 

In March 2025, Executive Director Pavithran attended the 2025 Zero Project Conference in Vienna, Austria. Pavithran presented on the importance of Creating a Disability Confident Civil Service. He was joined by Dr. Stefan Verhaegh from the Netherlands Food and Consumer Product Safety Authority. Later in March, Pavithran met with students from Utah Schools for the Deaf and the Blind (USDB), who were visiting the nation’s capital. The Executive Director spoke with the students about their experiences with accessibility, the ADA, the disability community, and the role of the Access Board. 

In April 2025, Board staff attended the 3rd Global Disability Summit (GDS) in Berlin, Germany, which was hosted by the governments of Germany and Jordan, along with the International Disability Alliance (IDA). Executive Director Pavithran presented on a panel which addressed the topic of building an accessible digital future for people with disabilities. Additionally, Board staff met with Member of German Parliament Wilfred Oellers. At the end of April, the Access Board held its annual in-person Board meeting in Washington, DC. During this meeting, the Board learned about the accessibility of the World War I Memorial from the National Park Service and visited the national headquarters of Paralyzed Veterans of American (PVA) to observe the accessibility of their facilities as well. 

In June 2025, Executive Director Pavithran represented the Access Board at the inABLE Inclusive Africa Conference 2025 in Nairobi, Kenya. He delivered a keynote on Advancing Global Accessibility and participated in a panel discussion on the Global Implementation of Accessibility. Later in June, the Chair of the Access Board, Elver Ariza-Silva, spoke on the importance of the Board, the ADA, and accessible business travel at the Global Business Travel Association (GBTA) Sustainability Summit 2025. 

The OTIS Director served as a member of the European delegation to the United Nations in FY 2025 for the United Nations Conference on the States Parties to the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (COSP18). She participated in a sub-event on the accessibility of artificial intelligence hosted by Poland. All the Board’s international engagements help support Objectives 4.1 and 4.2. 

#### Public Communication 

The Access Board has several external communication channels to provide information on accessibility guidelines and standards, services and programs, news updates, and accessible design resources. These channels provide opportunities for underserved communities to be informed and supported in redressing inequities throughout society (Objective 4.1), and for all members of the public to understand barriers to accessibility beyond the Board’s guidelines and standards (Objective 4.2). 

The Access Board provides a [free e-subscription](https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/usaccess/subscriber/new) to members of the public who can sign up for one or more of the agency’s seven topic areas: News, Buildings and Sites, Health Care, Information and Communication Technology, Recreation and Outdoor Areas, Streets and Sidewalks, and Transportation. In FY 2025, the Access Board sent 92 e-bulletins to its subscribers. Additionally, the total number of subscribers and subscriptions increased in FY 2025 when compared to FY 2024, with a total of 95,017 subscribers (an increase of 11,773) and 307,964 subscriptions (an increase of 39,954). This is demonstrative of the Public Affairs Program’s focus on intentional and effective communication. At the end of FY 2023, the Public Affairs Program also developed new, modernized promotional materials, including fact sheets, infographics, and three short videos. The topics of the videos include: (1) introductory information about the agency; (2) the ABA enforcement and compliance program, and; (3) the agency’s technical services and programs. These materials were distributed to the agency’s e-subscribers, as well as other various stakeholders and audiences, throughout FY 2024 and FY 2025. 

The Access Board’s website continues to serve as a crucial resource on accessibility guidelines and standards, technical assistance materials, ABA complaint methods, and news about agency activities and events. In FY 2025, the website logged around 1.3 million users and 3.6 million page views. 

In FY 2025, the Access Board implemented public information strategies and tactics on its social media platforms (X, LinkedIn, Facebook, and YouTube) to increase greater public awareness of the agency and its services, programs, events, and activities. On X, the Access Board has 2,817 followers and continues to stay engaged with its substantial network; notably, the agency published 306 posts or reposts throughout FY 2025 on the platform. On LinkedIn, the Board increased its followers by 17%, bringing the total LinkedIn 
followers to 5,787. On Facebook, the Board increased its followers by 35%, bringing the total Facebook followers to 1,544. The Access Board’s YouTube channel had over 41,000 views of its 52 videos (including three shorts) and over 450 new subscribers. Currently, the agency’s YouTube channel has a total of 462,538 views and about 4,858 subscribers. 

Furthermore, following discussions at the July 2024 Board meeting, a Board Communication Strategy was launched that included steps to ensure that all Board Members are aware of ongoing and upcoming events, news, and resources. Board Members have been encouraged to sign up for all Board email updates and to follow the Board on its social media platforms to amplify the reach of existing communication efforts. Beginning September 2024 and continuing throughout FY 2025, the Board Member Highlights newsletter was regularly sent to all Board Members. 
