## Goal #1: Establish technical specifications for accessible design

The Access Board's first strategic goal is supported by five objectives, which are:

-   Objective 1.1: Develop and update technical specifications to achieve accessibility.
-   Objective 1.2: Coordinate with standards and codes organizations to build effective industry accessibility standards.
-   Objective 1.3: Engage with the public, including underserved communities, to inform the development of accessible design.
-   Objective 1.4: Address accessibility of emerging technologies and design trends.
-   Objective 1.5: Collaborate with organizations to encourage research on accessibility.

### Background

The Access Board is responsible for developing and maintaining accessibility criteria for the built environment, transportation vehicles, ICT, medical diagnostic equipment, and outdoor recreational areas under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), the ABA, and Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act. In general, the Access Board has regulatory authority for two different types of accessibility criteria: (1) accessibility "standards," which have force of law upon issuance; and (2) accessibility "guidelines," which only have force of law when formally adopted through regulation by an enforcing entity---typically, another federal agency. For example, under the ADA, the Departments of Justice (DOJ) and Transportation (DOT) are obliged to use the Access Board's ADA Accessibility Guidelines as the baseline for their implementing regulations addressing public accommodations and transportation vehicles, respectively. However, until these departments promulgate final regulations, the ADA Accessibility Guidelines are not legally enforceable. By contrast, under Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, the Access Board is charged with issuing technical and functional performance standards for the accessibility of ICT that federal agencies develop, procure, maintain, or use, and these standards are enforceable upon promulgation by the Access Board.

Additionally, Objective 1.2 reflects the agency's long-standing history of working with model code groups and standards development organizations (SDOs) on codes and voluntary consensus standards affecting accessibility. Through service on numerous public-private code and standards committees, technical working groups, and cooperative research panels, Board members and staff leverage and apply the Access Board's expertise and perspective to the ongoing process of developing and maintaining accessibility-related model codes and standards. The Access Board believes such efforts enhance its credibility as a knowledgeable source of information regarding technical aspects of accessibility. Moreover, working cooperatively with codes organizations and SDOs' standards brings greater likelihood of harmonization between private codes/standards and federal accessibility requirements.

### Summary of Key Accomplishments in FY 2022

#### Final Accessibility Guidelines for Public Rights-of-Way and Shared Use Paths

The Access Board is working to complete final guidelines for public rights-of-way and shared use paths under the ADA and ABA. The Board was poised to finish this rule in the Fall of 2016 but suspended action when Executive Order (EO) 13771 *Reducing Regulation and Controlling Regulatory Costs* (January 2017) was issued. In FY 2021, following the rescission of EO 13771, the Access Board fully resumed work on this rule, including extensive informal coordination with DOJ and DOT (both of which will eventually need to adopt enforceable standards that meet or exceed the level of accessibility as stated in the guidelines), completion of its technical and legal review of the text of the final guidelines, and procedure with a regulatory assessment on the final rule. The Access Board hopes to issue a final rule in early 2023.

#### Accessibility Standards for Medical Diagnostic Equipment

The Access Board issued its accessibility standards for medical diagnostic equipment (MDE) in 2017. These standards address access to examination tables and chairs, weight scales, radiological equipment, and other equipment used by health care providers for diagnostic purposes. The standards specify that MDE transfer surfaces be adjustable across a specified range so that they can be aligned with the seat of a patient's wheelchair to facilitate transfer to the equipment. The Access Board proposed that transfer surfaces be adjustable from a low height of 17 inches to a high height of 25 inches based on a major study it helped sponsor on measures of people who use wheeled mobility aids. There was strong disagreement among commenters and stakeholders on what the low transfer height should be. Disability advocates supported the 17-inch minimum recommended by the anthropometric study, while MDE manufactures alleged that this height would be difficult and expensive to meet and that low height from 17 inches to 19 inches should be allowed, consistent with existing access standards and industry practice. In finalizing the MDE standards, the Access Board specified a temporary low transfer surface height range of 17 to 19 inches pending the collection of further information and research. This provision expired in January 2022. 

In FY 2021, the Access Board commissioned a study to further analyze wheelchair seat height. This study was completed in January 2022. In May 2022, the Access Board held an informational virtual public meeting on the study so that members of the public had an opportunity to comment on it and the finalizing of the low transfer height provision of the MDE Standards. The Access Board also received, and has reviewed, more than 100 written comments regarding the study and low transfer height. In the meantime, the Access Board issued a Direct Final Rule in February 2022 to extend, for an additional three years, the provision in the 2017 guidelines on low transfer height that had expired. The Access Board intends to issue a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) on this specification early in FY 2023.

#### Self Service Transaction Machines

Kiosks and other types of Self-Service Transaction Machines (SSTMs) are now a common feature in places of public accommodation, state and local government facilities (such as motor vehicle departments), and other facilities. SSTMs are used to conduct an expanding range of transactions and functions, including use as point-of-sales machines for self-checkout in a growing number of retail facilities, grocery stores, and drug stores. Kiosks at airports and hotels, as well as at doctors' offices, hospitals, and other healthcare providers, allow guests or patients to check in, and an increasing number of restaurants are providing touchscreens for customers to place orders and pay their checks.

Kiosks and SSTMs have long posed accessibility barriers to people with disabilities, particularly those who are blind or have low vision. Robust speech output is necessary to provide access for users unable to see display screens. They also can pose barriers for users who are deaf or hard of hearing if lacking captioning and text equivalents for audible information. Further, these devices must be accessible to people with physical disabilities, including those who use wheelchairs and other mobility devices, have limited dexterity, or who are of short stature.

As part of its work for Objective 1.4, the Access Board has devoted attention to these emerging technologies and ubiquitous trends. On September 21, 2022, the Board issued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPRM) on supplemental accessibility guidelines for different types of SSTMs, including electronic self-service kiosks, to be accessible to, and usable by, persons with disabilities.  The Board seeks comments on accessibility issues and solutions,[^i] related to the various types of SSTMs, use and design of SSTMs, location of SSTMs, the number of SSTMs that should be accessible at locations where there is more than one, and economic impacts on small business, non-profit, and governmental entities in the implementation of accessible SSTMs.

[^i]: Americans With Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities; Architectural Barriers Act Accessibility Guidelines; Self-Service Transaction Machines and Self-Service Kiosks, Federal Registers 9/21/2022, https://www.federalregister.gov/d/2022-20470, accessed 10/17/2022.

#### Electric Vehicle Charging Stations

The Access Board also worked to achieve Objective 1.4 by attending to electric vehicle (EV) charging stations and accessibility. EV charging stations are becoming commonplace with the rising production and use of electric and plug-in hybrid vehicles. According to the U.S. Department of Energy, there are nearly 50,000 public EV charging stations with almost 127,000 charging ports across the country. The Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act, which President Biden signed into law in November 2021, allocates $7.5 billion to build out a national network of 500,000 EV chargers to accelerate the adoption of EVs.

In July 2022, the Access Board released the Technical Assistance Document "Design Recommendations for Accessible Electric Vehicle Charging Stations." The document identifies some already existing requirements applicable to facilities generally under the ADA Accessibility Guidelines, which have been adopted as enforceable standards by DOJ, and ABA Accessibility Standards. In the absence of current technical standards, the document also provides numerous recommendations and best practices for elements of EV charging stations for accessibility. DOT directed potential recipients of the National Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Formula Program ("NEVI Formula") funds to comply with this Technical Assistance Document in constructing accessible EV charging stations.

To ensure that emerging technologies address accessibility, the Access Board announced, in its Spring 2022 Regulatory Agenda, its intent to publish a NPRM in Summer 2023 to supplement its Accessibility Guidelines under the ADA and ABA with scoping and technical requirements for electric vehicle charging stations.

#### Update of Existing ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Rail Vehicles

The Access Board continues to work in the area of transportation and achieve Objective 1.1. In FY 2022, the agency published an ANPRM to begin the process of updating its existing accessibility guidelines for rail vehicles covered by the ADA. The Access Board received over 200 public comments, which were evaluated and analyzed in preparation for the proposed rule.

ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Rail Vehicles will be addressed with an NPRM in 2023. The NPRM will address and incorporate comments received in response to the ANPRM and recommendations from the Access Board's Rail Vehicles Access Advisory Committee (RVAAC). The advisory committee, whose members included representatives from advocacy organizations, transit operators, rail car manufacturers, and other stakeholders, reviewed the existing rail car guidelines and identified areas that need to be updated because of accessibility issues, advances in technology, changes in car design, and other factors. Recommendations from the committee address rail car communications, boarding and alighting, on-board circulation, seating, and rooms and spaces. By taking seriously both the public's comments and RVAAC's recommendations for accessible rail vehicles, the Access Board contributes to the achievement of Objectives 1.3 and 1.4.

#### Advisory Guidelines for Onboard Wheelchairs

As part of accomplishing Goal #1, the Access Board is developing voluntary, advisory guidelines for onboard wheelchairs used on commercial passenger aircraft to aid DOT in its separate rulemaking to improve access to air travel. DOT, as part of a negotiated rulemaking process, is undertaking rulemaking to supplement its regulations issued under the Air Carrier Access Act to improve access to lavatories for passengers with disabilities on single-aisle aircraft with over 125 seats. DOT's proposed rule, which was published in January 2020, included enhanced requirements to improve the safety and usability of onboard wheelchairs which enable passengers with mobility disabilities to access aircraft lavatories. Structured as performance standards, the requirements specify features and capabilities for onboard wheelchairs while allowing manufacturers flexibility in how to achieve them in the design of their products.

At DOT's request, the Access Board drafted voluntary design guidelines for onboard wheelchairs that would assist air carriers and onboard wheelchair manufacturers by providing one example of how to satisfy DOT's performance standards. These non-binding guidelines, which the Access Board made available for public comment in FY 2019, would be optional; airlines would not be required to follow them and could use alternative designs that meet the level of accessibility specified by DOT's performance standards. The guidelines provide technical specifications (e.g., dimensions, features, and capabilities) for onboard wheelchairs.

In FY 2021, the Access Board proceeded to finalize its guidelines based on its review of public comments on the proposed rule. It also coordinated with DOT on its rulemaking on aircraft lavatories. In December 2021, the Access Board and DOT held a joint public meeting to collect additional information needed to complete work on DOT's Final Rule and the Board's onboard wheelchair guidelines.

#### Board and Staff Participation in Development of Voluntary Consensus Standards

To contribute to the achievement of Objectives 1.2, 1.4, and 1.5, Access Board staff also serve on numerous committees, technical working groups, and cooperative research panels to ensure that the agency's technical expertise and perspective are brought to bear on the development (or revision) of model codes and standards that affect accessibility in a wide range of settings, including such areas as: the built environment; recreational facilities; websites and web content; public transportation technologies; and traffic control devices.

In FY 2022, staff served on, or worked with, the following model code groups, standard-setting organizations, and research cooperatives, including:

-   American Society of Testing and Materials (ASTM) Committee on Sports Equipment, Playing Surfaces, and Facilities;
-   International Code Council (ICC) Consensus Committee on Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities (ANSI A117.1);
-   National Committee on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (NCUTCD);
-   National Cooperative Highway Research Project (NCHRP) (part of the Transportation Research Board [TRB]);
-   National Fire Protection Association (NFPA);
-   Transportation Cooperative Research Project (TCRP) (part of TRB);
-   Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology Society of North America (RESNA) Standards Committee on Cognitive Accessibility (CA);
-   RESNA Standards Committee on Inclusive Fitness (IF);
-   TRB Standing Committee on Innovative Public Transportation Services and Technologies;
-   RESNA Standards Committee for Assistive Technology for Air Travel (ATAT); and
-   World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) Accessibility Guidelines Working Group (AG WG).

During FY 2022, Access Board leadership and staff also participated in several interagency committees and working groups that foster cooperation on accessibility-related issues. Among other things, the Access Board served on the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)-sponsored Interagency Committee on Standards Policy (ICSP), which provides a forum for coordination of federal standards policies and promotion of standardization activities and reports to the Secretary of Commerce through the NIST Director. The Access Board also serves on the Artificial Intelligence Standards Coordination Working Group (AISCWG). The purpose of this working group is to facilitate the coordination of federal government agency activities related to the development and use of artificial intelligence (AI) standards, and to develop recommendations relating to AI standards  to the ICSP as appropriate. The AISCWG activities also support NIST's Federal Coordinator role for AI standards. The AISCWG reports to the Chair of the ICSP and advises the members of the ICSP on relevant issues.

Access Board leadership (including the Executive Director, the General Counsel, and the OTIS Director) assist in the planning and participation in the Interagency Disability Senior Leadership Networking Group. Meeting monthly, the group serves as a collaborative forum for federal agencies (or components) with similar disability-related missions to share information and best practices and to establish new partnerships.

Access Board staff also served on, and were actively involved with, the technically oriented Chief Information Officers Council's (CIOC) Accessibility Community of Practice (ACOP). Staff lead two of the three subcommittees of the ACOP, Best Practices and Education. Staff are also appointed to the Federal Communication Commission's (FCC) Disability Advisory Committee (DAC) as ex officio members.
