## Goal #2: Provide Education and Information on the Importance and Implementation of Accessible Design

The Access Board's second strategic goal is supported by four objectives, which are:

- Objective 2.1: Provide training on accessible design.
- Objective 2.2: Provide technical assistance on implementation of accessibility guidelines and standards.
- Objective 2.3: Create educational materials to promote understanding of accessible design.
- Objective 2.4: Use stakeholders' feedback to improve our information services.

### Background

The Access Board provides technical assistance (TA) to the public on its guidelines and standards and on other aspects of accessible design through a TA hotline, published guidance, and webinars and training. The agency responds to thousands of TA inquiries each year via phone and e-mail.  In recent years, the Access Board's website has also become a go-to resource on accessible design.  Users of the website can, among other things, view the Access Board's accessibility guidelines and standards, as well as animations illustrating the rationale behind the guidelines and standards and showing how accessible features are used by individuals with disabilities.  All published materials are downloadable in accessible formats.  Collectively, the Access Board's TA services play a critical role in assisting design professionals, governmental jurisdictions, people with disabilities, and other stakeholders understand and apply accessible design requirements.

### Summary of Key Accomplishments in FY 2023

#### Technical Assistance

The Access Board's TA continues to be one of the agency's signature services in serving the public, enabling the agency to achieve Objectives 2.1 and 2.2.  Inquiries are fielded through the Access Board's TA phone line and via e-mail.  Most inquiries help members of the public in their understanding of technical requirements and how to apply the accessibility guidelines and standards to their specific situations.  In FY 2023, over 5,000 TA inquiries were managed, representing a 17% increase from FY 2022.

To ensure consistent and accurate staff responses to accessibility questions, the Access Board developed a knowledge management system (KMS) to collect and store information and guidance generated in its provision of TA. This internal, centralized repository enables staff to document and categorize questions received and the specific answers provided by staff.  The KMS supports Access Board staff in easily retrieving and providing consistent assistance to members of the public.  Information housed in the KMS includes hyper-linked cross-references to agency guidance relevant to a given provision or topic, responses to past TA inquiries, and notations about accessibility or design issues that may warrant future attention by the agency (e.g., the development of educational and training materials).  The Access Board expects this critical tool to pay great dividends by enhancing the clarity and consistency of the technical assistance it provides to the public daily.

#### TA Guidance

As part of its TA program, the agency develops various educational materials (Objective 2.3) to help explain different aspects of its guidelines under the ADA, ABA, and other laws.  The agency's Guidance Documents and TA Documents review application of relevant existing ADA and ABA Accessibility Standards and non-mandatory recommendations and best practices to improve access to a site, building, facility, space, element, or service.  Access Board staff also produce informative animations that help design professionals understand the reason and method of application of the requirements in the ADA and ABA Accessibility Standards.  The agency's website provides a complete list of its [Guidance Documents]({{ site.baseurl }}/guidance.html) (including animations and videos) and its [TA Documents]({{ site.baseurl }}/tad).

The Access Board provides publicly available guides/technical bulletins that cover chapters 1-6 and signage in chapter 7 of the ADA and ABA.  In FY 2023, the Access Board’s work on producing more guides/technical bulletin has slowed as rulemaking efforts have increased.  Board staff have been working on the following guides:

- Chapter 7: Detectable Warnings (ADA and ABA)
- Chapter 10: Recreation (ADA)

#### Other Technical Assistance and Resources

The Access Board achieves Objective 2.3 through other efforts, such as collaborations, resources, and public communication. In FY 2023, Board staff accomplished several interagency collaborations, including in-depth technical assistance to the DOI’s National Park Service (NPS), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and HUD, and a partnership with Amtrak to facilitate continuous accessibility improvements as rail cars are updated. Board staff partnered with NPS to provide an onsite accessibility review of recent improvements at the Theodore Roosevelt Island National Park. They provided feedback on accessibility improvements for both the trails and monuments and provided recommendations for temporary and permanent improvements to ensure accessibility throughout the park. Board staff also reviewed and edited a FEMA accessibility checklist developed for on-site inspections to determine potential emergency response locations. In an ongoing collaboration with HUD accessibility staff, Board staff sought to unify responses for residential requirements, including Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) and Fair Housing. Board technical staff also continued its partnership with Amtrak and toured the new Acela train and the newly designed Superliner coach accessible restroom. During those visits, Board staff identified several design improvements to meet Amtrak’s accessibility obligations and to improve the disabled riders’ experience.

The Access Board’s website serves as a vital hub for resources that various stakeholders consult.  In FY 2023, the Access Board continued refining and updating the agency website as the national resource on ADA and ABA accessible design and federal accessibility guidelines and standards, including Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act.  Through this site, the Access Board provides updates to federal agencies and members of the public on rulemaking, research, ABA enforcement, training, technical assistance, and other programs.  In FY 2023, a new resource published is the [Best Practices for the Design of Accessible COVID-19 Home Tests]({{ site.baseurl }}/tad/radx/).  The materials are a collaborative project between National Institutes of Health (NIH) and RADx Tech, and the Access Board was asked to host and to consult on the accessibility of the materials.

In FY 2023, the Access Board continued development on the [ICT Testing Baseline for Web](https://ictbaseline.access-board.gov/) subdomain, a notable expansion of guidance materials available for Section 508 and ICT accessibility.  The principal idea behind the ICT Testing Baseline is that federal agencies should have a consistent approach to testing so that if one agency methodically audits a commercial product, and rates a product as being 508 conformant, then another agency can have confidence in those test results without having to perform its own audit.  The ICT Testing Baseline identifies the minimum requirements of any test process used to determine conformance of web content with Section 508 and the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0 Conformance Requirements (i.e., Success Criteria Level A and Level AA).  The ICT Testing Baseline is a Best Practice of the Federal CIOC ACOP, and federal agencies are encouraged to utilize the ICT Testing Baseline in their efforts to test web content for Section 508 conformance.  Access Board staff lead the work in close collaboration with GSA and other participants of ACOP.

The Access Board also routinely contributes to materials available on [Section508.gov](https://www.section508.gov/).  Of particular note this fiscal year are the instructions for the government-wide Section 508 assessment and articles on typography and equations.

#### Agency-Sponsored Trainings and Webinars

The Access Board continues hosting monthly webinars and providing a wide range of training at conferences and to specific audiences throughout the year.  In FY 2023, the agency hosted 127 webinars and trainings, reaching more than 20,000 participants.  The Access Board anticipates a continuous increase in the demand for training and webinars as it completes upcoming rules.

The Access Board continued presenting two free webinar series that disseminate technical information on accessibility standards and guidelines to a broad range of audiences.  Participants are provided the option to join live or to later view on-demand via archived recordings posted on the web.  Currently, the Access Board hosts a catalog of 142 archived webinars.  Additionally, there are 13 self-paced, archived webinars that offer continuing education credits (CEUs).

The webinars address a range of accessibility standards, information, and resources relating to both the built and digital environments.  The built environment sessions ([AccessibilityOnline](https://www.accessibilityonline.org/)) focus on the ADA and ABA Accessibility Standards and provide guidance on a range of facility types and review common sources of confusion.  These monthly 90-minute sessions are offered in cooperation with the National Network of ADA Centers.  All webinars include video remote interpreting (VRI) and real-time captioning.  CEUs were available to participants, if desired. Overall, in FY 2023, almost 7,000 people attended the sessions in this webinar series.

The second webinar series delivers 90 minute, bi-monthly [Section 508 Best Practices](https://www.accessibilityonline.org/cioc-508), in partnership with the Federal CIOC ACOP.  The Section 508 series provides a pipeline of information and best practices for federal agencies to emulate in meeting the accessible ICT requirements.  Recent topics include diversity, equity, inclusion, and accessibility (DEIA), accessibility in the federal workplace, strengthening and maturing accessibility training and testing programs, improving alt tag descriptions, accommodations in the federal workplace, accessible maps, and the Section 508 Playbook.  All webinars are made accessible and inclusive for all participants through video remote interpreting and real-time captioning.
