## Goal #4: Promote accessibility throughout society

The Access Board's fourth strategic goal is supported by two objectives, which are:

- Objective 4.1: Identify and address inequities in accessibility faced by underserved communities.
- Objective 4.2: Identify and work to address barriers to accessibility beyond those covered by our guidelines and standards.

### Background

Under its statutory authority, the Access Board works in promoting accessibility throughout all segments of society. In FY 2022, the agency implemented different strategies and activities to ensure that greater awareness of accessibility permeates various parts of society, and that the agency could listen to and collect information and comments from people with disabilities and those who serve people with disabilities.

Under the agency's bylaws, the Access Board holds five "regular" (i.e., business) Board meetings and one Board-sponsored public event each year. The five business meetings are typically held in-person at the Access Board's office in Washington, D.C., while the sixth, public event is held outside the D.C. metropolitan area. Most often, Board meetings are held over 2-3 days that include both informal (closed) sessions and formal (public) sessions. From May 2020 to May 2022, all Board meetings were held virtually due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

One function of these Board meetings is to strategize ways to accomplish Goal #4. Outside the context of Board meetings, staff is also engaged daily in promoting accessibility through not only the program-related work discussed elsewhere in this report, but also other efforts, such as hosting public events, speaking engagements, meeting with international delegations and organizations, and implementing public communication (email bulletins and social media campaigns).

### Summary of Key Accomplishments in FY 2022

#### Public Engagement and Information Gathering

In FY 2022, the Board held its regular slate of five business meetings, where four meetings were virtual and one meeting was in-person at the agency's Washington, DC office. All formal sessions at these Board meetings were open to the public through live web streams. Archival video recordings of public Board meetings are also posted on the Access Board's YouTube Channel and website.

The Access Board reinvigorated its out-of-town meetings with its sixth meeting of FY 2022, held in-person in Philadelphia from September 13 -- 15, 2022. This activity supported Objective 4.1, whereby the Board members and staff sought to better understand accessibility inequities that those in underserved communities face. The agency thoughtfully planned and intentionally met with local disability organizations and community leaders, chose site visits that mostly serve vulnerable populations, and held its town hall meeting at a local independent living center in downtown Philadelphia, which provided a central location to maximize attendance from across the city and region.

Over the three days, Board members and staff visited local sites and met with disability organizations, disability city leaders, the Philadelphia Mayor's office, and other city and federal agencies to learn more about the state of accessibility in the region, conducted seven free public accessibility trainings, and listened to members of the public testify about a range of concerns regarding accessibility and accessible design at the agency's town hall meeting. Members of the public voiced their concerns about accessibility barriers at a local post office, accessibility issues in the public right-of-way, a lack of services for adults with developmental disabilities, a lack of communication access at medical appointments, job interviews, and on public transportation, and unavailability of accessible at-home COVID tests, to name a few. Attendance for the in-person town hall meeting was about 50 people.

The Access Board's free public trainings included collaboration with staff from the U.S. Department of Education's National Digital Access Team and staff from the Mid-Atlantic ADA Center. The trainings took a variety of formats, including presentations and hands-on workshops, that focused on accessibility and accessible design related to the ADA and ABA Accessibility Standards, historic buildings and facilities, ICT, and digital environments. Cumulative attendance at these seven in-person trainings was over 170.

The town hall meeting and other events and activities gave the agency opportunities to garner information about accessibility and barriers. For FY 2023, the Access Board will consider this information as it strategizes how its services and programs may serve the public beyond rulemaking, thus supporting Objective 4.2.

#### Public Events

Throughout FY 2022, the Access Board hosted virtual public events in supporting Objective 4.1. In November 2021, Public Member Karen Braitmayer presented current trends in architectural design for toilet rooms, lavatories, adult changing tables, self-service transaction machines, wayfinding, dining surfaces and tables, and accessible routes, including those that have emerged in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.

Braitmayer highlighted aspects of those trends that advance equity and inclusion and discussed design alternatives to trends that are not fully accessible to all. Attendance for this event was 486 registrants. In January 2022, the Access Board hosted a virtual public event on equity in healthcare for people with disabilities, featuring presentations on standards and resources related to healthcare accessibility, including inclusive medical equipment, healthcare facility design, IT, and communication devices and systems. There were 700 registrants for this event.

As discussed under Goal #1 above, in FY 2022, the Access Board also held public meetings to gather information on accessibility, technical information, and public concerns to inform its rulemaking. In December 2021, DOT and the Access Board held a virtual public meeting to collect information on wheelchairs that are specifically designed for use on aircraft during flights. The agencies will use this information to finalize performance standards and advisory guidelines for aircraft onboard wheelchairs. The Access Board also hosted a virtual public meeting on accessible MDE and the adjustability of transfer surfaces for patients who use wheelchairs. The agency will use this information, including the submitted written comments, to assess specifications for transfer surfaces in its MDE Accessibility Standards and determine the appropriate height low height for transfer surfaces. For both of these events, the agency's public affairs program researched and collected contact information for organizations and associations that focus on underserved communities for the purpose of inviting their stakeholders.

#### Presentations

Board staff also pursued initiatives outside the context of Board meetings and the agency's hosted public events that served to promote the agency's mission and services, particularly regarding Objective 4.2. Agency staff were featured speakers or panelists at numerous conferences, forums, and other public events to discuss accessible design and accessibility. For example, Access Board Executive Director Sachin was a session presenter at the M-Enabling Summit 2021, and agency staff gave presentations at both government and industry events: the Partners for Automated Vehicle Education's virtual discussion on "Accessible Infrastructure and AVs"; California State University, Northridge Center on Disabilities' 36^th^ Assistive Technology Conference (CSUN 2021); DOI's 2021 Digital Week; the Interagency Accessibility Forum (IAAF) 2021; the Federal Reserve Board's National Disability Employment Awareness Month (NDEAM) event; the USDA's Section 508 Awareness Event, "Knowledge is Power"; the MITRE Corporation's NDEAM and Accessibility Technical Exchange Meeting event; the 2022 Winter ADA Coordinators Virtual Conference; the Arizona Center for Disability Law's African American Conference on Disabilities; the Society of Automotive Analysts webinar; and the Institute of Transportation Engineers Technical Conference. Agency staff also met with representatives from the National Park Service, Amtrak, the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), state and local departments of transportation, and codes and standards organization officials, from such organizations as RESNA, ICC, ASTM, and the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA).

#### Meetings

The Access Board developed Objectives 4.1 and 4.2 for alignment with EOs 13175 *Memorandum on Tribal Consultation and Strengthening Nation-to-Nation Relationships*, 13985 (aimed at advancing racial equity), and 14035 (aimed at DEIA in the federal sector). The agency has worked toward achieving the mission of EO 13175 by meeting with the Department of Education's Office of Indian Education and Native American Career and Technical Education Program and the Office of Indian Education to establish relationships and facilitate opportunities for collaboration and/or provide Access Board services. As discussed in greater detail under Goal #3 above, the Access Board Executive Director and Board staff met with the Interior Department's Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, who oversees the agency's Bureaus of Indian Affairs, Indian Education, and Trust Fund Administration, to discuss the Access Board's ABA enforcement program, training program, and technical assistance services. In FY 2023, the Board aims to hold a similar meeting with the new Director of the Indian Health Service (housed within the Department of Health and Human Services). The agency was also consulted by OPM as it planned its DEIA Summit 2022: A Whole-of-Government Approach to Disability Employment (initially scheduled for March 2022; postponed to December 2022). The Access Board continues to strategize and plan for ways to further the goals of these three executive orders, including working with a marketing firm to develop a more robust plan for communication and outreach to underserved communities.

Internationally, the Access Board engaged with representatives and organizations not only to discuss the agency's guidelines and standards, but also to promote and educate them on accessible design and accessibility. In FY 2022, Board leadership and other staff met with delegates and representatives from Poland's Government Plenipotentiary for Disabled People, the government of Germany, and Kyrgyzstan in a "Disability Rights" exchange project under the U.S. Department of State's International Visitor Leadership Program. Access Board leadership and other agency staff also met with advisors to European Parliament Member Katrin Langensiepen to provide information and training on the organization and structure of disability laws in the U.S. The training emphasized how the Access Board participates in the creation, implementation, and enforcement of those accessibility provisions. This information was used to create a report for the European Parliament's Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO). The IMCO will use the report in the design and establishment of an Accessible Centre by the European Commission.

Access Board staff participate as invited observers to the EN 301 549 Working Group hosted by the three European Standardization Organizations to revise the existing EU Accessibility Standard. Access Board staff, along with staff from the General Administration Services and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, meet every month with Shared Services Canada to collaborate on identifying and resolving barriers to implementing digital online accessibility throughout government.

#### Public Communication

The Access Board has several external communication channels to provide information on accessibility guidelines and standards, services and programs, news updates, and resources on accessible design. These channels provide possibilities for underserved communities to be informed and supported in redressing inequities throughout society (Objective 4.1) and for all members of the public to understand barriers to accessibility beyond the Access Board's guidelines and standards (Objective 4.2).

The Access Board's website continued to serve as a crucial resource on accessible design, guidance materials, and news about agency activities and events. In FY 2022, the website logged about 840,000 users and 2.3 million pageviews. The Access Board also modified and improved its website by developing new webpages on its [rulemaking and initiatives]({{ site.baseurl }}/ri/), [outreach]({{ site.baseurl }}/outreach/), and technical services, including easier access to its [Guidance Documents]({{ site.baseurl }}/guidance.html) and newly developed [Technical Assistance Documents]({{ site.baseurl }}/tad/). These additions provide a more streamlined presentation of important information and documents for the public.

In FY 2022, the Access Board implemented public information strategies and tactics on its social media platforms (Twitter, LinkedIn, Facebook, YouTube) to increase greater public awareness of the agency and its services, programs, events, and activities, especially among underserved communities. Through its public affairs program, the Access Board posted more frequently in comparison to FY 2021 on these accounts, increased followers, and engaged meaningfully with its networks. Additionally, the agency published more news and press releases in FY 2022 in comparison to FY 2021, and these releases are posted on the agency's website and distributed as e-mail bulletins to e-subscribers. The total number of subscribers and subscriptions also increased in FY 2022 when compared to FY 2021, with 53,119 subscribers (an increase of 26.76%) and 158,874 subscriptions (an increase of 32.69%). The public affairs program also distributed the agency's updated Information Brochure, as well as flyers for the agency's town hall meeting and accessibility trainings in Philadelphia, to various underserved individuals and organizations in the fields of architecture, engineering, design, and construction.

In April 2022, the Access Board published its Equity Action Plan (discussed under Goal #3, above) on its website. The plan has three primary actions: undertaking an outreach campaign, establishing and strengthening relationships with federal agencies, and working with federal agencies to establish ABA compliance strategies. For more information, visit the [Access Board's Equity Action Plan webpage]({{ site.baseurl }}/equity/).

Finally, Access Board staff presented in a webinar organized by the Administration for Community Living's (ACL) Office for American Indians, Alaska Natives and Native Hawaiian Programs. As part of ACL's Title VI webinar series, Access Board staff provided an overview of the agency, the ABA enforcement program, and relevant materials to advance accessibility on Tribal lands. In continuing to achieve Objective 4.1 during FY 2023, the Access Board will seek out opportunities to connect with federal agencies focused on serving Tribal Nations and to establish relationships with Tribal communities.
