---
title: "Chapter 4: Accessible Routes"
order-number: 8
file: accessible-routes.pdf
file-description: PDF version of Chapter 4 Accessible Routes Guide
---
This guide explains scoping and technical requirements for accessible
routes in the [ADA Standards]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/).

### Where Required: Site Arrival Points 

[[§206.2.1]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-206_2_1)]

At least one accessible route must be provided within the site to
accessible facility entrances from these site arrival points, where
provided:

- accessible parking and accessible passenger loading zones
- public streets and sidewalks
- each public transportation stop.

#### Accessible Routes from Site Arrival Points [§206.2.1]

![Figure of site with accessible routes shown leading from public
sidewalk, parking, and bus stop top facility entrance. Notes: Site
arrival points include accessible parking spaces and accessible
passenger loading zones, public transit stops located on sites, and
public streets and sidewalks. An accessible route must connect site
arrival points to each accessible entrance they serve. Accessible routes
must coincide with, or be in the same vicinity as, general circulation
paths (§206.3). If no pedestrian route onto a site is provided and site
entry is by vehicle only, an accessible route from the site boundary is
not required (§206.2.1, Ex. 2). Where a vehicular way does provide
pedestrian access, such as a shopping center parking lot, an accessible
route is required.
]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar2.jpg){: .img-large}

![Details of facility on a site show accessible route connection to
public sidewalk within boundary of site bounded by public right-of-way,
accessible parking, and bust stop. Notes: Public Streets and Sidewalks -
Requirements for accessible routes apply within site boundaries (i.e.,
property lines or designated portions of public rights-of-ways).
Connecting accessible routes to public streets and sidewalks may require
coordination with local jurisdictions. Parking and Passenger Loading
Zones - Accessible routes must connect to access aisles serving
accessible parking spaces and accessible passenger loading zones. It is
advisable, though not required, to locate accessible routes in front of
parking spaces instead of behind them. Accessible routes that cross or
overlap vehicular ways are not required to be marked as a crossing (but
access aisles at accessible parking spaces and passenger loading zones
must be marked). Public Transportation Stops - Accessible routes serving
public transportation stops must connect to boarding and alighting areas
and, if bus shelters are provided, to the clear floor space required
within
shelters.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar3.jpg){: .img-large}

### Accessible Routes within a Site

[[§206.2.2]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-206_2_2)]

At least one accessible route within the boundary of the site
originating from site arrival points must connect all accessible
buildings, facilities, elements, and spaces on a site.

#### Accessible Routes (Exterior) within a Site

![Exterior accessible routes at a site with multiple buildings. Notes: An accessible route must connect site arrival points such as accessible parking spaces, passenger loading zones, and transportation stops to each accessible facility they serve. An accessible route within the boundary of the site must connect each facility on a site (except those connected only by a vehicular way that does not provide pedestrian access). An accessible route from public streets and sidewalks must connect directly or indirectly to all accessible facilities and elements on a site. An accessible route must serve all accessible spaces and elements on a site, including those that are exterior, such as courtyards and drinking fountains. An accessible route is not required where the only means of access between buildings, facilities, or elements is a vehicular way not providing pedestrian access (§206.2.2, Ex.). Accessible routes must coincide with, or be in the same area as, circulation paths. This promotes equivalency and precludes accessible routes that are obscure, hard to find, or that diverge from circulation paths more than is necessary (§206.3).]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar4.jpg){: .img-large}

### Accessible Routes within a Building or Facility

At least one accessible route must connect all accessible spaces and
elements. If a circulation path is interior, the accessible route also
must be interior. Accessible vertical interior circulation must be in
the same area as stairs and escalators, not isolated in the back of the
facility.

![Accessible route extending from ramp and connecting to maneuvering
clearance at door and clear floor space at a drinking fountain and an
elevator call button. Notes: An accessible route from facility entrances
is required to each accessible room, space, and element. Vertical access
between stories is required in most multi-story facilities, but
exceptions are permitted for some non-governmental facilities under a
certain size or number of stories. Accessible routes must serve each
level on a floor required to be accessible. Vertical access can be
achieved by ramps, curb ramps, elevators or, where permitted, platform
lifts. Accessible routes must connect to an unobstructed side of the
clear floor space required at accessible
elements.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar5.jpg){: .img-large}

{% include recommendation.html
text= "In alterations and additions, an accessible route is required where circulation paths are altered or built (§202.3).  Also, alterations or additions to areas containing a primary function (a major activity for which a facility is intended) require an accessible path of travel that extends to site arrival points to the extent that the additional cost does not exceed 20% (§202.4). Otherwise, if a space or element is altered, but the circulation path to it is not, an accessible route is not required."
%}

### Where Required: Multi-Story Buildings and Facilities

[[§206.2.3]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-206_2_3)]

An accessible route must connect each story and mezzanine in a facility
unless an exception applies. However, if a building does qualify for an
exception in the Standards:

- all other provisions in the Standards still apply to stories and
    mezzanines not served by an accessible route
- elevators provided anyway must fully comply (as standard or LULA
    elevators)
- vertical access still may be required by an applicable state or
    local code.

#### Private Sector Facilities (Places of Public Accommodation & Commercial Facilities)

![Symbols of shopping mall, health care facility, transit station, and
airport crossed out.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar6.jpg){: .float-right .thumbnail}

An accessible route is not required to connect stories in a
private sector facility (place of public accommodation or commercial
facility subject to title III of the ADA) that is either less than 3
stories or that has under 3,000 square feet per story and is not a:

- shopping center or mall with 5 or more sales or rental
    establishments
- professional office of a health care provider
- public transit facility or airport terminal

![Two story facility with caption: Exception: Facility under 3 stories
(no limit on square footage). Narrow three story facility with caption:
Exception: Each story under 3,000 sq. ft. (no limit on number of
stories)]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar7.jpg){: .img-large}

In mixed use facilities that otherwise qualify for this exception,
vertical access is required to any story containing occupancies not
permitted the exception.

![Two story facility with health care occupancy on upper floor and
accessible route to upper floor with caption: An accessible route is
required to stories containing an occupancy excluded from the exception,
such as a health care provider. Two story facility with health care
occupancy on ground floor with caption: An accessible route is not
required to stories without occupancies excluded from the
exception.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar8.jpg){: .img-large}

#### Public Sector (Government) Facilities

![government facility
icon]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar9.jpg){: .float-right .thumbnail}

An accessible route between stories is required in
multi-story government facilities subject to title II of the ADA except
those with no more than two stories where the inaccessible story above
(or below) the entry level has no public use space and an occupant load
of five maximum.

![Two story facility with a small upper story with a maximum occupancy
of five. Caption: Exception: Two story government facilities where the
story above (or below) entry level has no public use space and a maximum
occupant load of
5.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar10.jpg){: .img-large}

<div class="border clearfix" style="padding: 5px;">
    <h4>Exceptions for Specific Occupancies [§206.2.3]</h4>
    <img alt="Symbols of residential facility, transient lodging, detention and correctional facilities, and airport" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory}}chapter4/4ar11.jpg" class="float-right thumbnail">
    <p>The Standards also include limited exceptions for accessible routes between stories in air traffic control towers and, under certain conditions, detention and correctional facilities, residential facilities, multi-story transient lodging guest rooms, and qualified historic facilities.</p>
</div>

### Mezzanines (Private and Public Sector Facilities) [§206.2.4, Ex.3]

An accessible route must serve mezzanines in multi-story facilities
where vertical access between stories is required or provided. An
accessible route to mezzanines is not required in:

- single story facilities (mezzanines do not count as a story) or
- facilities that are exempt from the requirement for an accessible
    route between stories (additional conditions apply to restaurants
    and cafeterias).

![Facility with mezzanine. Caption: Exception: Mezzanines in
single-story facilities and facilities where an accessible route between
stories is not required. Restaurant/ cafeteria symbol with note: In
restaurants and cafeterias, this exception applies only where a
mezzanine contains less than 25% of the combined dining and seating area
and equivalent services and décor are provided on an accessible level
(§206.2.5, Ex.
1).]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar12.jpg){: .img-large}

### Alterations and Additions

[[§206.2.3.1](../ada-standards/chapter-2-scoping-requirements.html#206%20Accessible%20Routes), [§202.4](../ada-standards/chapter-2-scoping-requirements.html#202%20Existing%20Buildings%20and%20Facilities)]

In alterations and additions to multi-story facilities, an accessible
route to stories and mezzanines is required where a stair or escalator
is provided where none existed previously and major structural
modifications are necessary (§206.2.3.1). The accessible route must
connect each level served by the new stair or escalator (except where a
compliant connecting accessible route already exists).

An accessible route to stories or mezzanines may be required as part of
an accessible path of travel to primary function areas that are altered
or added (§202.4). Alterations or additions involving primary function
areas must include an accessible path of travel that extends to site
arrival points to the extent that the cost is not "disproportionate"
(i.e., more than 20% of the total cost of alterations to the primary
function area).

Exceptions for accessible routes between stories and to mezzanines
permitted in new construction, including those based on the number of
stories or square footage per story, apply fully to alterations and
additions, including those that trigger an accessible path of travel to
a primary function area.

#### When Accessible Routes to Stories/ Mezzanines are Required in Alterations or Additions

![Building schematic with stairways highlighted and route to primary
function area on upper floor highlighted. Notes: Where stairs or
escalators are added where none existed previously and major structural
modifications are necessary, accessible routes must connect each level
served by the new stair or escalator (§206.2.3.1). As necessary to
achieve an accessible path of travel to a primary function area that is
altered or that is part of an addition, unless the cost is more than 20%
of the cost of the overall alteration (§202.4). All exceptions for
accessible routes to stories or mezzanines allowed in new construction
also apply to altered facilities and
additions.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar13.jpg){: .img-large}

### Accessible Routes to Accessible Spaces and Elements

[[§206.2.4]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-206_2_4)]

An accessible route must connect accessible facility entrances with all
accessible spaces and elements in a facility that are connected by a
circulation path (§206.2.4). Exceptions for accessible routes to stories
and mezzanines (§206.2.3 and §206.2.4, Ex. 3) do not extend to level
changes within a story or mezzanine that are part of a required
accessible route to spaces or elements. These exceptions apply only to
the portions of an accessible route that connect stories or that connect
a story and mezzanine.

#### Dining Areas in Restaurants and Cafeterias

  In newly built restaurants and cafeterias, an accessible route must serve all dining areas, including those that are raised or sunken or located outdoors (§206.2.5).  If a story or mezzanine is exempt from the requirement for vertical access, an accessible route within each story or mezzanine is still required to connect dining areas and other spaces and elements even though an elevator (or ramp) does not serve the story or mezzanine.
  
  ![Restaurant dining area]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar14.jpg){: .img-large} 

{% include recommendation.html
text= "In alterations, an accessible route is not required to existing raised/ sunken dining areas or to all parts of outdoor dining areas if the same services and decor are available in other dining areas that are accessible (§206.2.5, Ex. 2).  A platform lift (or limited use-limited application elevator) can be used to provide access to such areas in alterations, but not in new construction (§206.7)."
%}

<div style="margin-top: 10px; padding-top: 10px;" class="border">
    <img alt="Comedy and tragedy masks" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar15.jpg" class="float-left thumbnail" style="padding-bottom: 20px;">
    <h4>Performance Areas</h4>
    <p>An accessible route must connect stages and other performance areas directly to seating areas where they are directly connected by a circulation path as well as to dressing rooms and other ancillary spaces used by performers (§206.2.6).</p>
</div>

### Press Boxes

[[§206.2.7]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-206_2_7)]

An accessible route is required to press boxes except where the
aggregate area of all press boxes serving a playing field or assembly
area is no more than 500 sq. ft. if press boxes are either:

- free-standing and elevated above grade at least 12' or
- located in bleachers with points of entry on one level.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <span class="grid-line bold">Free-Standing Press Box</span>
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar17.jpg" alt="Free-standing press box">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <span class="grid-line bold">Bleacher-Mounted Press Box</span>
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar18.jpg" alt="Bleacher-mounted press box">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

{% include grid-2col-largeleftimg-righttext.html
img-file= "chapter4/4ar19.jpg"
img-alt= "Press box with interior and exterior space
highlighted."
text-title= ""
text= "The 500 sq. ft. maximum applies to the gross floor area,
including exterior floor space, of all press boxes serving a playing
field, stadium, or other assembly area.  If a site has multiple assembly
areas with press boxes, the aggregate area of press boxes is to be
calculated separately for each assembly area."
%}

### Employee Work Areas

[[§206.2.8]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-206_2_8)]

Common use circulation paths must be accessible in employee work areas
that are 1,000 sq. ft. or more in size. This applies to the size of work
areas as defined by permanently installed walls, partitions, counters,
casework, or furnishings, but not modular partitions or furnishings,
including systems furniture. Other portions of areas used only by
employees for work are not required to comply.

This requirement does not apply to employee work areas that are either
less than 1,000 sq. ft. in size or that are exterior and fully exposed
to the weather. However, these types of employee work areas still must
be accessible for "approach, entry, and exit" (§203.9). This requires a
connecting accessible route to the work area, a compliant entrance,
including entry doors or gates, and a wheelchair space within the work
area. Work areas must also be served by an accessible means of egress,
as required by the International Building Code. (See the [ADA Scoping:
New Construction Guide](chapter-2-new-construction.html).)

#### Common Use Circulation Paths in Employee Work Areas Over 1,000 SF

 ![Large office area with over 15 work station cubicle seen from above.
Notes: The requirement applies to employee work areas that are at least
1,000 sq. ft. in size as defined by permanently installed partitions,
counters, casework, or furnishings. Access is required for common use
circulation paths. Portions of circulation paths that lead to individual
work stations or to elements are not required to comply. The clear width
of circulation paths, including ramps, can be less than the minimum
specified where it is essential to the function of the work being
performed (§403.5, Ex., §405.5, Ex.). Doors and gates that are part of
common use circulation paths, including those leading to and from the
work area, must fully
comply.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar20.jpg){: .img-large}

![Boilers with stair leading to catwalk on top. Caption: Exception for
Employee Work Area Equipment - Compliance is not required for those
portions of common use circulation paths that are integral to work area
equipment such as storage tanks and machinery. Other portions of common
use circulation paths must
comply.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar21.jpg){: .img-large}

<div class="border clearfix" markdown="1" style="padding: 5px;">
#### Recreation Facilities [§206.2.9 -- §206.2.17]

![Golfing icon]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar22.jpg){: .float-right .thumbnail}

The ADA Standards also address accessible routes to amusement rides, boating facilities, bowling lanes, court sports, exercise machines and equipment, fishing piers and platforms,  golf and miniature golf facilities, and play areas.
</div>

### Accessible Routes

[[§402]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-402)]

Components of accessible routes include walking surfaces, doorways,
ramps, curb ramps, elevators, and, where permitted, platform lifts.

#### Components of Accessible Routes

![Accessible route extends from ramp to door and elevator. Handrail
shown along a portion of the route. Notes: Doors, Doorways, and Gates
(§404). Doors, doorways, and gates along accessible routes and to
accessible spaces must comply. Vertical Access (§405 - §410) Changes in
level great than ½" must be spanned by ramps, curb ramps, or elevators.
Platform lifts are allowed only in certain specified locations and in
alterations. Handrails (§403.6) Handrails provided along walking
surfaces must comply (and are required at most ramps and stairs).
Limited Changes in Level (§403.4) Changes in level up to ½" must be
beveled (but can have a vertical edge if ¼" maximum). Walking Surface
Slope (§403.3) The running slope of walking surfaces cannot exceed 1:20
(5%), but other components of accessible routes, such as ramps and curb
ramps, can be more steeply sloped. Cross slopes must be 1:48 max.
Clearances (§403.5) The continuous clear width must be at least 36" (32"
min. for short distances, such as doorways), and additional clearances
are required for passing space and 180⁰ turns around narrow
obstructions. Surfaces (§403.2) All surfaces of accessible routes must
be firm, stable, and slip resistant. Carpeting and surface openings,
where provided, must comply.
]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar23.jpg){: .img-large}

### Clearances

[[§403.5]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-403_5)]

The minimum 36" continuous clear width of accessible routes can reduce
to 32" at points, such as doorways, for a maximum distance of 24".
Greater clearance is required for 180 degree turns around narrow
obstructions and for wheelchair turning space. The minimum clearance
cannot be reduced by any elements, including handrails or protruding
objects.

![Plan view or route shown to be 36" wide min. with areas that are 32"
wide min. that are 24" long max. and separated by 48"
min.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar24.jpg){: .img-large}

#### 180 Turns Around Obstructions

Additional clearance is required at 180 degree turns around an element
that is less than 48" wide. The clear width must be at least 48" at the
turn and 42" minimum approaching the turn (unless the clear width at the
turn is 60" minimum).

![Two alternative plan views are shown of an accessible route that has a
180 degree turn about an object less than 48 inches wide. In one figure,
the clear width is 42 inches minimum approaching the turn, 48 inches
minimum at the turn, and 42 inches minimum leaving the turn. In other
figure, the clear width is 36 inches minimum approaching the turn, 60
inches at the turn, and 36 inches minimum leaving the
turn.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar25.jpg){: .img-large}

### Passing Space

[[§403.5.3]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-403_5_3)]

Passing space is required every 200 feet and must be provided as a 60"
by 60" minimum space or as T-shaped space where each stem is at least
48" long.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar26.jpg" alt="Two people using wheelchairs passing in corridor with 60 inches by 60 inches passing space shown.">
      <span class="grid-line bold">60” Min. by 60” Min. Passing Space</span>
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar27.jpg" alt="T-shaped passing space in corridor with each stem at least 48 inches long measured from the intersection. ">
      <span class="grid-line bold">T-Shaped Passing Space</span>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Handrails Along Walking Surfaces

[[§403.6]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-403_6)]

Handrails are required at ramps with a rise greater than 6" and at
stairs that are part of a means of egress, but not at other locations.
Where handrails are provided along other portions walking surfaces, they
must comply. (Handrails provided in elevator cabs or on platform lifts
are not required to comply).

#### Handrails along Walking Surfaces

![Corridor with doorway and adjacent handrail.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar28.jpg){: .img-right .img-medium}

- 34" to 38" high measured to the top of the gripping
    surface.
- Gripping surface must be continuous the full length and top and
    sides cannot be obstructed.
- The bottom gripping surface can be obstructed up to 20% of the
    length (or along the full entire length when part of crash rails or
    bumper guards).
- No sharp or abrasive elements on gripping surfaces or adjacent
    surfaces, and no rotation within fittings.

Surface requirements and clearances facilitate a power grip along the
length of handrails. Handrails can have circular or non-circular
cross-sections, but must have rounded edges. The gripping surface and
adjacent surfaces must be free of abrasive or sharp elements.

#### Circular Cross Section and Clearance (§505.5, §505.7)

![Handrail circular cross section 1/1/4" to 2" in diameter with a 1 ½"
clearance behind and below. Note: Specifications for handrails also
address the diameter of circular cross sections and required knuckle
clearance.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar29.jpg){: .img-large}

#### Non-Circular Cross Section and Clearance (§505.5, §505.7)

![Handrail non-circular cross section (square with rounded corners) with
2 ¼" max. dimension, rounded edges, 4" to 6 ¼" perimeter dimension, 1 ½"
clearance behind, and clearance below that is 1 ½" (less 1/8" for each
½" additional perimeter dimension. Note: Non-circular cross sections
must have rounded edges and meet perimeter and cross-section dimensions.
Other profiles meeting these criteria are
permitted.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar30.jpg){: .img-large}  

### Common Questions

![question mark]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}ques.jpg){: .float-right .thumbnail}

#### If no pedestrian route onto a site is provided, is an accessible route still required?

An accessible route from the boundary of the site is not required where
the only means of site arrival is a vehicular way without pedestrian
access. Where vehicular ways are also intended to accommodate pedestrian
travel, such as a shopping center parking lot, an accessible route is
required.

#### Do accessible routes that cross vehicular ways need to be marked as a crossing?

No, accessible routes that cross vehicular ways are not required by the
Standards to be marked as a crossing. The Standards only require access
aisles at accessible parking spaces and accessible passenger loading
zones to be marked. (Local codes and traffic laws may require crossings
to be marked).

#### Do stories not required to be on an accessible route have to comply with the Standards?

Yes, stories (and mezzanines) not connected by an accessible route must
still meet all other applicable requirements in the Standards. This
ensures access for people with disabilities who can use stairs and
facilitates compliance should vertical access be achieved through later
renovations or additions.

#### Do basements count in determining a facility's story count?

As defined in the Standards, a "story" pertains to those portions of
buildings "designed for human occupancy included between the upper
surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above"
(§106.5). A basement or other level below grade designed for human
occupancy (i.e., equipped with lighting, ventilation, and means of
egress) counts as a story. Basements or other levels not containing any
space designed for human occupancy are not considered stories under the
Standards.

#### Is an accessible route required to rooftop levels?

In facilities where an accessible route is required to each story
(§206.2.3), an accessible route must serve rooftop levels that contain
public or common use spaces or elements that are required to be
accessible, such as sun decks, lounges, dining areas, bars, or swimming
pools. An accessible route is not required to rooftop levels in those
facilities that are exempt from the requirement for an accessible route
to each story based on the number of stories or the square footage per
story. In determining whether a facility qualifies for this exception,
rooftop levels are not counted as a story unless they meet the
definition of "story." The Standards define a story as "that portion of
a building or facility designed for human occupancy," (i.e., equipped
with lighting, ventilation, and means of egress) that is "included
between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or
roof next above" (§106.5).

#### Do the exceptions for accessible routes between stories apply to facilities that are only partially occupied by entities not permitted the exception, such as health care facility or shopping center?

Accessible routes between stories are not required in private sector
facilities that are either less than 3 stories or that have less than
3,000 square feet per story excluding the professional offices of health
care providers, shopping centers and malls with at least 5 sales or
rental establishments, and public transit facilities, including airport
terminals. In mixed use facilities that otherwise qualify for this
exception, an accessible route is required to serve each story
containing occupancies not permitted the exception. For example, if all
sales or rental establishments of a shopping center are on the same
story, an accessible route is required only to that story. If located on
multiple stories, an accessible route must connect to each story that
contains a sales or rental establishment.

![Two-story facility with retail establishments on ground floor only.
Note: All sales/ rental establishments located on accessible ground
floor (vertical access to upper stories not required in facilities
permitted exception). Two-story facility with retail establishments on
both floors. Note: Vertical access is required to stories containing
sales/ rental establishments in shopping centers or malls not permitted
exception).]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4ar31.jpg){: .img-large}

#### When alterations are made on an upper story of a facility, is vertical access required?

If an alteration includes installation of a stair or escalator where
none existed previously and involves major structural modifications, an
accessible route between levels served by the stair or escalator is
required (unless an accessible route already exists). If alterations are
made to a primary function area on an upper floor, an accessible path of
travel to the area is required to the extent that the cost is not
disproportionate (i.e., more than 20% of the cost of the overall
alteration). In any alteration, an accessible route between stories is
not required in a facility that qualifies for those exceptions permitted
in new construction based on the number of stories or square footage per
floor.

#### When an addition increases the number of stories or square footage beyond the maximum permitted by the exception, is an accessible route between stories required?

If a facility no longer qualifies for the exception for multi-story
facilities due to an increase in square footage or stories, an
accessible route between stories is required where the work also
includes installation of a stair or escalator where none existed
previously and major structural modifications are needed (unless a
compliant accessible route between stories already exists). The
accessible route must connect the levels served by the new stair or
escalator. Also, if the addition includes a primary function area, an
accessible path of travel to the primary function area is required,
including where it involves travel between stories or levels, to the
extent the cost does not exceed 20% of the cost of the overall
alteration. Compliance in an alteration, including with the requirement
for an accessible route between stories, is not required where it is
"technically infeasible." In this case, compliance is required to the
maximum extent feasible.
