---
title: "Chapter 6: Drinking Fountains"
order-number: 16
file: /files/ada/guides/drinking-fountains.pdf
file-description: PDF version of Chapter 6 Drinking Fountains Guide
redirect_from: 
    - /guidelines-and-standards/buildings-and-sites/about-the-ada-standards/guide-to-the-ada-standards/chapter-6-drinking-fountains/
---

This guide explains requirements in the [ADA Standards]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/) for
drinking fountains. 

### Required Compliance

[[§211]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-211)]

Where drinking fountains are provided, access is required for both
people who use wheelchairs and for standing persons. This dual access
must be provided on each floor of a facility equipped with drinking
fountains, as well as an exterior site and each secured area of a
building where drinking fountains are provided. Where one unit is
planned in any of these locations, at least two units or a combination
high-low unit must be provided for dual access in each such location. If
multiple units are planned on a floor, exterior site, or secured area,
then 50% must be wheelchair accessible and 50% accessible for standing
persons (rounding up for either type in the case of odd numbers).

![Images of office building, exterior courtyard, and door with keypad
security system]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/1.png){: .img-large}

<div class="margin-left-8 margin-right-8 text-center" markdown="1">
_Scoping for drinking fountains applies separately to each floor of a
facility, secured area, and exterior site that contains drinking
fountains. In each such location with drinking fountains, half of the
units must be wheelchair accessible and the other half accessible for
standees. If only one unit is planned in any of these locations, at
least two separate units or a combination high-low unit is required for
dual access._
</div>

{% include recommendation.html
text= "Where multiple units are provided on a floor, exterior site, or secured area, provide both wheelchair and standing access at each location for greater convenience, especially if units are separated by significant distances."
%}

#### Secured Areas

![Security intercom]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/2.png){: .float-right .thumbnail}

The Standards specifically address access to drinking
fountains located within secured areas because they often serve only a
portion of a facility\'s occupants. The term \"secured area\" is
intended to apply to any space where entry is restricted or controlled.
Levels of security can range from rooms entered only with an access card
to high-security environments such as holding areas of prisons and
jails. (In detention and correctional facilities, units that only serve
inaccessible housing or holding cells but not accessible cells are
exempt (§211.1, Ex).)

#### Alterations and Additions 

[[§202]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-202)]

In alterations and additions, requirements for drinking fountains apply
where units are altered, replaced, or added to a facility (§202.2,
§202.3). Access to drinking fountains is also required when alterations
or additions are made to areas containing a primary function (i.e., a
major activity intended for a facility). Primary function areas that are
altered or added to a facility must be connected by an accessible path
of travel which includes, where provided, compliant drinking fountains,
as well as restrooms and telephones, serving the primary function area.
The accessible path of travel is required to the extent that it does not
cost more than 20% of the cost of the work to the primary function area
(§202.4). See the [Alterations and Additions
Guide](../chapter-2-alterations-and-additions). 

#### Water Coolers and Bottle Fillers

![Bottle filler and water
cooler]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/3.png){: .float-right .thumbnail}

If a drinking fountain is provided, a water cooler, bottle
filler, or nearby sink cannot substitute for either the wheelchair
accessible or the standing height drinking fountain in new construction,
additions, or alterations. Water coolers and bottle fillers can be
provided at, or integrated with, compliant drinking fountains. No
drinking fountains are required where none are planned, including where
water coolers or bottle fillers are provided.

When provided, fixed or built-in water coolers and bottle fillers must
meet requirements for operable parts (§309), including:

- location on an accessible route;
- clear floor space for either a forward or side approach; and
- controls, if hand-operated, that are within accessible reach range and are usable with one hand and without tight grasping, pinching, twisting of the wrist, or more than 5 pounds force.

Bottle fillers must comply where provided, including when integrated
with drinking fountains. If only one bottle filler is provided at only
some drinking fountains or at one bowl of a hi-lo unit, it is advisable
to locate it at the wheelchair accessible unit or bowl.

### Wheelchair Accessible Drinking Fountains

[[§602.1 -- §602.6]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-602)]

Provisions for wheelchair accessible units require access for a forward
approach and address spouts, water flow, and operable parts. Units can
be wall mounted or free-standing.

![Wall-mounted wheelchair accessible drinking fountain with forward
approach clear floor space highlighted. Notes: Clear Floor Space
(§602.2) for a forward approach centered on the unit; Operable Parts
(§602.3) within accessible reach range and usable with one hand and
without tight grasping, pinching, twisting of the wrist, or more than 5
lbf.; Spout Height (§602.4) 36" max. above the finish floor or ground.
Figure: Detail of spout and water flow 4\" high min. Caption: Water Flow
(§602.6). Figure: A drinking fountain in plan view with a spout less
than 3\" from the front of unit and an angle of the water stream 30
degrees max. measured horizontally relative to the face of the unit. A
drinking fountain in plan view with a spout 3\" - 5\" from the front of
unit and an angle of the water stream 15 degrees max. measured
horizontally relative to the face of the
unit.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/4a.png){: .img-large}

#### Spout Location (§602.5)

<div class="margin-left-8 margin-right-8 text-center" markdown="1">
_Spouts must be 15\" min. from the vertical support and 5\" max. from the unit\'s front edge, including bumpers._
</div>

![Drinking fountain with rectangular bowl with spouts 15" min. from the
vertical support and 5" max. from the unit's front edge. Drinking
fountain with round bowl with spouts 15" min. from the vertical support
and 5" max. from the unit's front edge.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/8.jpg){: .img-large}

#### Clear Floor or Ground Space

[[§602.2]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#602.2-Clear-Floor-Space)]

Clear floor or ground space for a forward approach must be centered on
the unit. Additional clearance is required if the space is obstructed on
both sides for more than half the depth, such as at alcoves.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/9.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain in plan view with clear floor space 30 inches min. by 48 inches min. centered on the unit. The unit overlaps the front portion of the clear floor space by a depth of 17 inches min.">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/10.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain in an alcove with clear floor space that is obstructed on both sides more than 24 inches due to the recess and is 36 inches wide min.">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

Knee and toe space is required below the unit. The combined depth of the
knee and toe space must be at least 17\" (and 25\" max.) measured from
the leading edge of the unit, including bumpers.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/11.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain (side view) with knee and toe space below the unit highlighted. Note: Knee and toe space depth measured from the leading edge.">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/12.jpg" alt="Shown in profile: Knee space 11 inches deep and toe space 6 inches deep for a total depth of 17 inches. The leading edge of the knee space is 27 inches high min and extends in 8 inches min, then reduces to 9 inches over a 3 inch space (6:1 slope). The clearance continues as toe space 9 inches.">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Drinking Fountains for Children's Use

[[§602.1 -- §602.6]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#ada-602)]

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <span class="grid-left">Drinking fountains designed specifically for children ages 12 and younger can provide a parallel approach instead of a forward approach if the spout is 30 inches high max and no more than 3-1/4 inches from the front edge of the unit, including bumpers (§602.2, Ex). Parallel clear floor space is not required to be centered on the unit."</span>
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/14.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain with outlet centerline 3-1/2 inches max to front edge, including bumpers">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/13a.png" alt="Children's drinking fountain with a spout 30 inches max high and clear floor space for a side approach.">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Drinking Fountains for Standing Persons

[[§602.7]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#602.7-Drinking-Fountains-for-Standing-Persons)]

Drinking fountains for standing persons must have spouts 38\" to 43\"
high and compliant operable parts and be located on an accessible route.
They cannot obstruct the forward approach clearance, including knee and
toe space, required at wheelchair accessible units.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/15.jpg" alt="Unit with a high bowl with a spout 38 inches to 43 inches high next to a low bowl.">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/16.jpg" alt="Unit with a high and a low bowl. Recommendation: Locate standee units outside clear floor space of wheelchair accessible units.">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

{% include recommendation.html
text= "Although cantilevered units for standing persons with knee and toe space can overlap the clear floor space of adjacent wheelchair accessible units, it is better to locate them outside this clear floor space so that they do not impact access to low units."
%}

### Drinking Fountains as Protruding Objects

[[§602.1]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/#602.1-General)]

Requirements for protruding objects (§307) apply to drinking fountains.
Drinking fountains with leading edges higher than 27\" must be recessed
in alcoves or otherwise treated so that they do not protrude more than
4\" into circulation paths. Alcoves must be sized to accommodate the
clear floor space required at wheelchair accessible units.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/projecting_fountain.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain recessed in alcove.">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/17.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain in alcove (plan view) with leading edge projecting 4 inches max. beyond recess">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

Wheelchair accessible units that provide, but do not exceed, the 27\"
minimum knee clearance do not require treatment as a protruding object
because the leading edge is at the maximum limit for cane detectability.
Such units can be used to enclose one side of cantilevered units for
standees. Other fixed objects, such as benches and planters, can be used
to recess drinking fountains.

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/18.jpg" alt="High drinking fountain located between an adjacent wall of corner and a low drinking fountain.">
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
      <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter6/drinking-fountains/projecting_fountain_-_bench.jpg" alt="Drinking fountain on wall with benches on both sides.">
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

### Common Questions

### ![question mark]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}ques.jpg){: .float-right .thumnail} 

#### Can water coolers or bottle fillers substitute for accessible drinking fountains?

If drinking fountains are provided, water coolers or bottle fillers
cannot be used as a substitute for either a wheelchair accessible unit
or a unit for standees in new construction, alterations, or additions.
Water coolers and bottle fillers can be provided in addition to, or be
integrated with, drinking fountains. If no drinking fountain is
provided, a compliant drinking fountain is not required even if water
coolers or bottle fillers are provided. Water coolers and bottle fillers
that are fixed or built-in must comply as operable parts (§205, §309)
but are not subject to other requirements for drinking fountains.

#### When must drinking fountains be designed for use by children?

The Standards do not specify where units must be mounted or designed
specifically for children. This determination is left to other building
codes or regulations, good practice, client preference, or other
factors. Instead, the Standards provide an exception that can be used
when the decision is made to mount drinking fountains at heights for
children ages 12 and younger. Under this exception, a parallel approach
is permitted instead of a forward approach with knee and toe clearance
in order to accommodate a lower unit height provided that the spout is
no higher than 30\" and no more than 3½\" from the front edge of the
unit, including bumpers (§602.6).

#### Do drinking fountains have to meet requirements for protruding objects?

Yes, the Standards limit the protrusion into circulation paths of those
objects, including drinking fountains that have leading edges higher
than 27\" above the finish floor or ground. Cantilevered units with
leading edges higher than 27\" must be recessed or protected as
protruding objects. Wheelchair accessible units with a 27\" absolute
knee clearance below do not require treatment as protruding objects.

#### Can units for standees overlap the clear floor space required at wheelchair accessible units?

Units for standing access (or other elements) that do not have compliant
knee and toe clearance cannot overlap or protrude into the clear floor
space at adjacent wheelchair accessible units. Cantilevered units for
standees with compliant knee and toe space can overlap the clear floor
space at wheelchair accessible units but it is advisable to locate them
outside the clearance since they can interfere with use of the lower
unit when located in close proximity.
