---
title: "Chapter 4: Elevators and Platform Lifts"
order-number: 11
file: elevators.pdf
file-description: PDF version of Chapter 4 Elevators and Platform Lifts Guide
---
This guide explains criteria for elevators and platform lifts in
the [ADA Standards]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/).

### Required Compliance

[[§206.6](../ada-standards/chapter-2-scoping-requirements.html#206%20Accessible%20Routes)]

Elevators are the typical means of providing an accessible route between
stories and to mezzanines. In facilities not required to have an
accessible route between stories or to mezzanines (see the Accessible
Routes guide), a limited-use/ limited-application (LULA) elevator is
permitted. LULAs also are allowed as an alternative to platform lifts
and private residence elevators.

<table class="usa-table">
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th scope="col">Facility or Space</th>
            <th scope="col">Elevator Type Permitted (if provided instead of ramp)</th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <th scope="row">Facilities required to provide an accessible route to stories/ mezzanines</th>
            <td>Elevator (§407)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th scope="row">Facilities not required to provide an accessible route to stories/ mezzanines</th>
            <td>Elevator (§407) or LULA (§408)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th scope="row">Residential Dwelling Units</th>
            <td>Elevator (§407), LULA (§408), or Private Residence Elevator (§409)</td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th scope="row">Spaces permitted to be served by a platform lift</th>
            <td>Elevator (§407), LULA (§408), or Platform Lift (§410)</td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>

<div  class="clearfix">
    <div class="border float-right img-medium margin-1">
        <h3>ASME A17.1 Code [§407.1]</h3>

        <p class="text-italic">Elevators, including LULA and private residence elevators, must meet
        the ASME A17.1 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators. The ADA
        Standards currently require compliance with the A17.1-2000, including
        the 2002 and 2003 addenda. This edition must be followed until the
        Standards are updated to reference a later edition of the ASME A17.1
        code. In the interim, compliance with a later edition of the ASME A17.1
        (now ASME A17.1/CSA B44) may be possible under the provision for
        "equivalent facilitation" (§103) only if it is comparable to, or
        stricter than, the referenced edition. Questions about the ASME A17.1
        code should be directed to the American Society of Mechanical Engineers <a href="http://www.asme.org">
        www.asme.org</a>.</p>
    </div>

    <p>Only passenger elevators as classified by the referenced elevator safety
    code (ASME A17.1) can be used to meet the ADA Standards. Each passenger
    elevator provided, whether required or not, must comply with the ADA
    Standards. This includes those elevators that move both passengers and
    freight, sometimes loosely referred to as "service elevators." Examples
    include elevators in residential or retail facilities that are regularly
    used by tenants or customers but that are also used to move furniture,
    merchandise, or other freight.</p>

    <p>Freight elevators cannot be used to satisfy the requirement for an
    accessible route between floors. Freight elevators are defined by the
    ASME A17.1 code as those elevators "used primarily for carrying freight
    and on which only the operator and the persons necessary for unloading
    and loading the freight are permitted to ride." Where provided, they are
    not required to meet the ADA Standards. Construction elevators, like
    other structures directly associated with the actual processes of
    construction, are exempt (§203.2).</p>
</div>

### Elevators

[[§407](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

#### Elevator Landing Requirements

[[§407.2](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

![Elevator landing showing hall signals located 72" min. high measured
to centerline and call buttons with clear floor space and located within
reach range measured to centerline. Details show hall signal visible
indicators 2 ½" high min, call buttons ¾" min. in diameter (smallest
dimension) that are raised and flush. Hoistway sign detail show number
2" high min and raised 1/32" with a 3/8" min. separation from braille
below and raised borders. Notes: Hall Signals (§407.2.2) - Required at
each hoistway (including elevators with only 2 stops); Indicate car
arrival and travel direction (separate fixtures are not required to
indicate direction); Visible indicators can be vertical or side-by-side;
Visible from area of hall call button, including those in cars (1 in-car
lantern is acceptable if visible from the hall call button); Audible
signals: one (up)/ two (down) or annunciator; Frequency: 1500 Hz max.
(300 -- 3,000 Hz verbal annunciator); Signal level: 10 dB min. above
ambient, 80 dB max. Call Controls (§407.2.1) - ithin reach range,
measured to centerline of highest operable part; compliant as operable
part; Up button above down button; Visual indication of call registered
and call answered; Raised from, or flush with, faceplate or, if
provided, trim ring or ferrule. Hoistway Signs (§407.2.3) - Both jambs,
48" -- 60" AFF (measured to raised character baseline); Characters and
symbols raised 1/32" min., sans serif; Compliance with other
requirements in 703.2 for raised characters (upper case, style
,character proportion and spacing, stroke thickness, and line spacing);
Grade II braille complying with 703.3 below raised characters; Tactile
star with braille ("MA'IN'") required on both jambs at the main entry
level]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl2.jpg){: .img-large} 

#### Elevator Door Requirements

[[§407.3](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

![Timing distance shown measured 60" in front of farthest call button
controlling car to centerline of hoistway door. Caption: Door and Signal
Timing (§407.3.4) - Timing begins at audible and visible notification of
car arrival based on when the signal becomes visible from the specified
location point in front of the call button. At elevators with in-car
lanterns, timing begins once doors open wide enough for the signal to be
visible from this point. Minimum timing from car arrival notification to
start of door closing: D / 1.5 ft/s (no less than 5
sec.)]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl3a.jpg){: .img-large} 

 ![Elevator door must fully open 3 seconds min. to min. clear width of
36" (42" for center door of 80" min by 51" min car). A tolerance of
minus 5/8" allowed for 36" min. clear width only. Reopening device
detection points: 5" high and 29" high. Caption: Door Delay (§407.3.5)-
Doors must remain fully open 3 seconds min. in response to a call.
]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl4b.jpg){: .img-large}

### Elevator Car Requirements

[[§407.4](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

The ADA Standards specify the minimum car dimensions. Alternative
configurations that provide unobstructed wheelchair turning space (60"
diameter circle or T-turn) with the doors closed are permitted.

#### Elevator Car Dimensions (§407.4.1)

![One figure shows an elevator car with a centered door. The door clear
width is 42" minimum and the car width measured side to side is 80"
minimum. The car depth is 51" minimum measured from the back wall to the
front return, and 54" minimum measured from the back wall to the inside
face of the door. Second figure shows an elevator car with an
off-centered door. The door clear width is 36" minimum and the car width
measured side to side is 68" minimum. The depth is 51" minimum measured
from the back wall to the front return, and 54" minimum measured from
the back wall to the inside face of the door. Third figure shows a car
with a clear door width of 36" minimum and the car width measured side
to side is 54" minimum. The car depth is 80' minimum measured from the
back wall to the front return. Fourth figure shows a car with a clear
door width of 36" minimum and the car width measured side to side is 60"
minimum. The car depth is 60" minimum measured from the back wall to the
front return. Any 36" min wide door permitted a tolerance of minus
5/8".]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl5.jpg){: .img-large} 

#### Elevator Car Requirements

[[§407.4.2](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators) -- [§407.4.5](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

Other requirements for elevator cars include:

- compliant floor surfaces
- a maximum 1¼" horizontal clearance between car platform sill and hoistway landing
- a self-leveling feature
- 5 ft. candles min. illumination at platform, controls, threshold, and landing sill

#### Car Leveling and Platform to Hoistway Clearance

![1 ¼" max clearance between hoistway landing and car platform. Car
platform must have compliance surface and be automatic self-leveling
within ½" tolerance maintained under 0 to rated loading
conditions.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl6.jpg){: .img-large}

#### Car Controls

[[§407.4.6](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators) and [§407.4.7](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

If more than one car control panel is provided in a car, both must
comply (except in existing cars where only 1 panel must comply).

![Car control panel shown with number in ascending order and columns
that read left to right. Max. height for buttons is 48" max. (54" max if
car serves over 16 openings and parallel approach provided). Emergency
controls buttons grouped at bottom of panel 35" min. measured to
centerline of bottom buttons.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl7.jpg){: .img-large} 

**Car Controls (§407.4.6 and §407.4.7)**

![Car control panel detail. Notes: Raised characters to immediate left
of button, raised 1/32" min, sans serif (sufficient color contrast from
the background is recommended); raised characters 5/8" to 2" high;
Buttons ¾" min. in diameter (smallest dimension) must be raised from or
flush with faceplate/ trim ring (ferrule); Braille (Grade 2) below or
next to raised characters or symbols; 3/16" min separation between
braille and raised numbers; Floor designation buttons provide visual
indication of registered call that extinguishes upon car arrival; Main
Entry Floor (required tactile symbol with braille); Door open and close
buttons, where provided, identified by required tactile symbols and
braille and located above emergency buttons; Emergency buttons (alarm
and, where provided, emergency stop) grouped at bottom 35" min AFF
measured to button centerline and identified by required tactile symbols
and braille; Emergency stop (where provided on existing panels -- no
longer permitted by the ASME A17.1 code); In-car switches not for
passenger use (e.g., fireman's operations) are not required to comply;
Keypads (§407.4.6.3 and §407.4.7.2) - Keypads, if provided in cars, must
comply: Location within reach range, measured to centerline of highest
operable part; Standard phone keypad arrangement; Raised or flush
buttons, ¾" min. in smallest dimension; Raised dot "5" key
(0.025"-0.037" high, 0.118" 0.120" base diameter); Compliant visual
characters (§703.5) centered on
button]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl8.jpg){: .img-large}

#### Car Position Indicators

[[§407.4.8](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)\]

![Car position indicators shown above door or above control panel]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl9.jpg){: .img-right}

Position indicators are required for all cars, including those of 2-stop
elevators. Specifications include:

- ½" min. character height
- Illumination of each floor level passed or stopped at
- Automatic verbal announcement of stop or non-verbal audible signal of passed floors and stops (if elevator not destination-oriented and has a rated speed of 200 ft./ minute max.)
- Frequency: 300 -- 3,000 Hz for verbal annunciator, 1500 Hz max. for non-verbal signal
- Signal level: 10 dB min. above ambient to 80 dB max.

#### Emergency Communication

[[§407.4.9](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#407%20Elevators)]

{% include imgright-italictextbelow.html
img-file= "chapter4/4epl10.jpg"
img-alt= "Emergency phone"
text= "The ASME A17.1 code addresses features of required two-way emergency communication devices, including controls and visual indicators. The ADA Standards apply requirements for operable parts and tactile characters and symbols."
%}

The ASME A17.1 code requires a two-way means of emergency communication
in elevator cars. This system establishes direct communication with
authorized personnel and must be activated by a push button. Handsets,
which are vulnerable to vandalism, and closed compartments are
prohibited. The activating button must be permanently identified by a
tactile phone symbol and the term "HELP" located either on or adjacent
to the button. Operating instructions are also required.

The ASME A17.1 also requires a visual signal, such as a labeled LED
light or lighted jewel, to acknowledge that the emergency call has been
received. The visual signal is considered a component of the two-way
communication, though voice communication may also be established. The
visual indication must be on the same panel as the "HELP" push button
and extinguish when a communications link is terminated.

In addition to the ASME requirements, the ADA Standards require that the
push button and other device controls comply as operable parts (§309).
They also require the push button to be labeled with a specified tactile
phone symbol and braille. Operating instructions and other information,
including the label for the visible signal, must meet criteria for
visual characters but are not required to be tactile.

#### Destination-Oriented Elevators

With destination-oriented elevators, passengers indicate the floor
destination when calling an elevator, usually through a keypad. Lobby
indicators designate which car to use, which is programmed by the time
of arrival. This type of elevator reduces the number of stops per trip.
The requirements of §407 apply to destination-oriented elevators, but
some provisions or exceptions, which are summarized here, are unique to
this type of elevator.

##### Destination-Oriented Elevators: Call Signals

![Destination oriented elevator with details showing hall signals and
hoistway signs with floor and car designations that are 2" high min.
raised 1/32" min, and separated 3/8" min from braille and raised
borders. Notes: Hall Signals (§407.2.2) - Visible and audible signals
indicating the arrival of designated car (if the same tone/ announcement
in calling a car is used to signal car arrival, then compliance with
audible specifications, such as the indication of direction, is not
required); Visible and audible signals are not required at each elevator
if they include car designation; Visible signals centered 72" min AFF
and visible from floor area adjacent to hoistway entrance; Visible
signal element 2 ½" min. measured along vertical centerline of element;
Audible and visible differentiation of each elevator in a bank. Hoistway
Signs (§407.2.3) - Both jambs, 48" -- 60" AFF (measured to raised
character baseline); Car designation required below floor designation;
Characters and symbols raised 1/32" min., sans serif; Compliance with
other requirements in 703.2 for raised characters (upper case, style
,character proportion and spacing, stroke thickness, and line spacing);
Grade II braille complying with 703.3 below raised
characters.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl11.jpg){: .img-large} 

#### Destination-Oriented Elevators: Car Arrival

![Destination-oriented elevator car with details of hall signal and
hoistway signs. Notes: Hall Signals (§407.2.2) - Visible and audible
signals indicating the arrival of designated car (if the same tone/
announcement in calling a car is used to signal car arrival, then
compliance with audible specifications, such as the indication of
direction, is not required); Visible and audible signals are not
required at each elevator if they include car designation; Visible
signals centered 72" min AFF and visible from floor area adjacent to
hoistway entrance; Visible signal element 2 ½" min. measured along
vertical centerline of element; Audible and visible differentiation of
each elevator in a bank. Hoistway Signs (§407.2.3) - Both jambs, 48" --
60" AFF (measured to raised character baseline); Car designation
required below floor designation; Characters and symbols raised 1/32"
min., sans serif; Compliance with other requirements in 703.2 for raised
characters (upper case, style ,character proportion and spacing, stroke
thickness, and line spacing); Grade II braille complying with 703.3
below raised characters; floor and car designation 2" high min, raised
1/32" min, 3/8" min separation from braille and from raised
borders]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl12.jpg){: .img-large} 

#### Other provisions unique to destination-oriented elevators:

![Destination-oriented elevator car positon
indicator]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl13.jpg){: .img-right}

##### Elevator Door Requirements (§407.3)
- _Specifications for door and signal timing do not apply (§407.3.4, Ex. 2)_

##### Car Position Indicators (§407.4.8)

- Visual display of each floor a car has been programmed to stop at and automatic verbal announcement of each car stop are required
- Visual indicators: ½" min. character height, location above control panel/keypad or door, must extinguish when call answered
- Automatic verbal announcement (300 -- 3,000 Hz, 10dB min. above ambient to 80 dB max.)

### Existing Elevators (Alterations)

**Alterations to Existing Elevators**

{% include imgright-italictextbelow.html
img-file= "chapter4/4epl14.jpg"
img-alt= "Row of elevator cars"
text= "When an alteration is made to an existing car, it also must be made to all other cars that respond to the same hall call."
%}

The Standards apply to existing elevators that are altered. Compliance
is determined by the scope of the project. For example, if a car
operating panel is upgraded, at a minimum the new panel must comply.
Other elements of a car that are not altered are not required to comply.
Alterations made to an existing car also must be made to each elevator
programmed to respond to the same hall call so that a consistent level
of accessibility within banks is maintained.

Requirements for new elevators are also applied to those that are
altered, but specific exceptions or alternative specifications are
permitted for existing elevators that are altered. These provisions
unique to existing elevators are summarized here. In addition, altered
elevators must meet applicable sections of the referenced A17.1 code
that apply to alterations.

Provisions or exceptions specifically for existing elevators do not
apply to elevators that are newly added to an existing facility which
must comply with the requirements for new elevators. Certain alterations
or additions to a facility may trigger the requirement for an accessible
route between floors, including:

- where stairs or escalators are added in an alteration or addition
    where none existed previously and major structural modifications are
    necessary, an accessible route must connect each level served by the
    new stair or escalator (§206.2.3.1);
- as needed to provide an accessible path of travel to a primary
    function area that is altered or that is part of an addition, unless
    the cost is more than 20% of the overall cost (§202.4).

#### Provisions or Exceptions Specific to Existing (Altered) Elevators

![Existing (altered) elevator car. Notes: Hall Signals (§407.2.2) -
Visible signals are not required to comply and audible signals are
exempt from frequency and decibel ranges; Signals do not have to
indicate travel direction; Call Controls (§407.2.1) - Call buttons can
be recessed; Existing call buttons can be less than ¾" in size and can
be located 54" max. (instead of 48") above the floor, measured to the
centerline of the highest operable part; Elevator Door Requirements
(§407.3) - Existing manually operated doors without reopening devices
that meet door requirements (§404.2) are permitted; Power-operated doors
can have a narrower clear width (32" min. if the hoistway depth is 24"
max.); Elevator Car Requirements (§407.4) - Existing cars with a clear
depth 54" min., a clear width 36" min., and a clear floor area of 16 sq.
ft. are permitted; When new compliant operating panels are installed,
existing panels that remain are not required to comply; Car control
buttons can be recessed and can be 54" max. above the floor if a
parallel approach is provided; If space does not permit location of
tactile markings to the left of control buttons, they can be placed as
near to the control as possible. ISA Designation (§216.7) - In
facilities with existing non-compliant elevators, the International
Symbol of Accessibility (ISA) must clearly identify those elevators that
do meet §407.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl15.jpg){: .img-large}

{% include recommendation.html
text= "For greater usability, make those altered elements covered by an exception fully comply wherever practicable."
%}

### Limited-Use/ Limited-Application Elevators

[[§408](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#408%20Limited%20Use%20/%20Limited%20Application%20Elevators)]

LULA elevators are passenger elevators that are permitted in facilities
where an accessible route between stories or mezzanines is not required
and as an alternative to private residence elevators and platform lifts.
They cannot substitute for elevators complying with §407 that are
required to meet requirements for accessible routes. For the most part,
LULAs are held to the same requirements for elevators in §407 and
applicable sections of the ASME safety code. However, LULAs have smaller
car sizes, slower speeds, shorter travel distances, and alternative
types of doors. Besides car size, provisions for LULAs differ from those
of §407 in that:

- Hoistway doors can be swinging type (they must open and close
    automatically, be power-operated, meet requirements for doors and
    referenced ANSI/BHMA Standards for low-energy doors, and remain open
    for at least 20 seconds)
- Requirements are not included for door timing and delay or for car
    position indicators

#### LULA Car Dimensions (§408.4)

![Figure one shows the configuration for new construction. The door
clear width is 32" minimum and the car width measured side to side is
42" minimum. The car depth is 54" minimum. Doors must be located on
narrow end. Second figure shows alternative dimensions of clear interior
space 51 by 51" minimum that are permitted if door clear width is36"
minimum. Third figure shows dimensions for existing LULA cars that are
altered: 36" minimum width, depth 54" minimum, and the net clear car
area is 15 square feet
minimum.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl16.jpg){: .img-large}

### Private Residence Elevators

[[§409](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#409%20Private%20Residence%20Elevators)]

Private residence elevators are permitted only within a residential
dwelling unit or in a multiple dwelling unit facility as a means of
access to a single private residence. Elevators in residential
facilities not located within or serving individual dwelling units must
meet requirements in §407.

![Private residence elevator. Notes: General (§409.1) - Automatic
operation; Compliance with the referenced ASME A17.1 standard. Call
Buttons (§409.2) - Compliant as operable parts, including reach range
and clear floor space, and ¾" min. in smallest dimension. Elevator Doors
(§409.3) - Car and hoistway doors/gates must be power operated and meet
the ANSI/BHMA standard for low-energy doors and other applicable
provisions for doors in §404 (compliance with maneuvering clearance on
push side of doors not required); Manual-open, self-close doors/gates
permitted for cars with more than 1 opening; Required location on narrow
end of car; Must remain open for 20 seconds min. Elevator Cars (§409.4): Inside dimensions: 36" min. by 48" min.; Compliant floor surfaces; 1½"
max. clearance between platform and edge of landing sill (later editions
of the ASME A17.1 specify 1¼" max); Automatic leveling with floor
landing within ½" tolerance under rated to 0 loading conditions; 5 ft
candles min. at platform, controls, threshold, and landing sill; Car
controls must be raised or flush button, ¾" min. in smallest dimension,
comply as operable parts, and be located within accessible reach range
on side wall 12" min. from any adjacent wall; Telephone and emergency
signal two-way communication device required in car with compliant
operable parts, including hardware of closed compartment if provided;
telephone cord must be 29" long min.
]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl17.jpg){: .img-large} 

### Platform Lifts 

#### Where Platform Lifts are Permitted

[[§206.7](../ada-standards/chapter-2-scoping-requirements.html#206%20Accessible%20Routes)]

Platform lifts can be part of an accessible route in existing facilities
that are altered. In new construction, platform lifts can be used to
provide an accessible route to these areas only:

-   wheelchair spaces, performance areas, and speakers' platforms
-   incidental spaces with a maximum occupancy of 5 that are not for
    public use
-   raised courtroom stations, such as jury boxes, witness stands,
    judges' benches, clerks stations and depressed areas such as the
    well of the court
-   levels within transient lodging guest rooms and residential dwelling
    units
-   certain recreation facilities: amusement rides, play areas,
    team/player seating areas in sports facilities, recreational boating
    facilities, and fishing piers and platforms

They also are permitted in new construction where topography or other
existing exterior site constraints make a ramp or elevator infeasible.
While the site constraint must reflect exterior conditions, the lift can
be installed in the interior of a building. For example, an exterior or
interior platform lift could be used to provide an accessible entrance
or to coordinate interior floor levels at a new building constructed
between and connected to two existing buildings if there is not
sufficient space to coordinate floor levels and also to provide ramped
entry from the public way.

{% include recommendation.html
text= "In alterations, it is advisable that platforms lifts be used only in instances where a ramp or elevator is technically infeasible or in the locations permitted in new construction."
%}

### ASME A18.1 Safety Standard

[[§410.1](../ada-standards/chapter-4-accessible-routes.html#410%20Platform%20Lifts)]

![ASME A18.1 Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway
Chairlifts]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl18.jpg){: .float-right .thumbnail}

Platform lifts must meet the ASME A18.1 Safety Standard for
Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts. The ASME A18.1 covers the
design, construction, installation, operation, inspection, testing,
maintenance and repair of lifts that are intended for transportation of
persons with disabilities. The ADA Standards currently require
compliance with the 1999 edition or the 2003 editions of the A18.1
Standard. Either of these editions must be followed until the ADA
Standards are updated to reference a later edition of the ASME A18.1
Standard. In the interim, compliance with a later edition of the ASME
A18.1 Standard may be possible under the provision for "equivalent
facilitation" (§103) only if it is comparable to, or stricter than, the
referenced edition. Questions about the ASME A18.1 code should be
directed to the American Society of Mechanical Engineers
([www.asme.org](http://www.asme.org)).

Under the ADA Standards, platform lifts must be independently operable
and must allow unassisted entry and exit from the lift. Attendant
operation, while allowed by the ASME A18.1 Standard, is prohibited by
the ADA Standards. Portable lifts do not satisfy the ADA Standards even
when they comply with ASME A18.1.

The ASME A18.1 Standard addresses requirements for runway enclosures,
electrical equipment and wiring, structural support, headroom clearance
(80" minimum), access ramps, pits, and other features. The ASME A18.1
Standard recognizes two types of platform lifts: vertical platform lifts
and inclined platform lifts. Lifts without platforms, including stairway
chairlifts, are not permitted by the ADA Standards except at swimming
pools and spas because they require transfer from wheeled mobility aids.
(Specifications for pool lifts include a fixed seat and footrests, but
not a platform (§1009.2)).

<div class="grid-container">
  <div class="grid-row">
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
        <span class="text-center text-bold">Vertical Platform Lift</span>
        <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl19.jpg" alt="Vertical platform lift">
        <span class="grid-line text-italic">The ASME A18.1 Standard specifies platform and runway enclosures for vertical platform lifts, among other features, and limits the travel distance.  The size of platforms cannot exceed 18 sq. ft.</span>
    </div>
    <div class="tablet:grid-col">
        <span class="text-center text-bold">Inclined Platform Lift</span>
        <img class="img-full" src="{{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl20.jpg" alt="Inclined platform lift">
        <span class="grid-line text-italic">Inclined platform lifts can have a folding platform and are typically located at stairways.  They must be installed so they do not encroach on required means of egress. Passenger retaining arms are permitted as an alternative to a platform enclosure under the ASME A18.1 Standard.</span>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>

#### Requirements for Platform Lifts

![Platform lift requirements. Notes: Platforms (§410.2 - §410.4) -
Platforms must meet requirements for clear floor space and floor
surfaces, including changes in level, and the clearance between the
platform sill and edge of runway landing cannot exceed 1¼" (ASME A18.1
specifies 3/8" -- 3 /4"). Operable Parts (§410.5) - Controls must meet
requirements for operable parts, including reach ranges. Doors and Gates
§410.6) - Doors and gates must be power-operated, meet criteria for
low-energy doors, including the referenced ANSI/BHMA standard (§404.3),
and remain open for at least 20 seconds. (Self-closing manual types are
allowed at lifts with no more than 2 stops and doors/ gates on opposite
ends.) Standby Power (§207.2) - Platform lifts permitted to be part of
an accessible means of egress by the referenced editions of the
International Building Code must be equipped with standby power.
]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl21aa.JPG){: .img-large}

#### Platform Lift Clear Floor Space and Doors/ Gates

![One figure shows platform lift with doors with clear width 32" min. on
opposite narrow ends of platform that is 36" min wide and 48" min long.
Second figure shows lift with 32" min. wide door on narrow end that is
36" min wide and 42" min. wide door on adjacent side that is 60" long
min. Note: The clear floor space of platforms must be 36" wide min. If
doors/gates are on the narrow end only, the length is 48" min. If a
door/gate is on the longer side, the min. length is 60" to accommodate
side approach
maneuvering.]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}chapter4/4epl22a.JPG){: .img-large}       
### Common Questions

![question mark]({{ site.baseurl }}{{ page.image-directory }}ques.jpg){: .float-right .thumbnail}

#### Elevators

##### Are freight or service elevators required to comply?

When an elevator is used to provide a required accessible route between
stories, it must meet requirements for passenger elevators. Elevators
that serve passengers but can also be used to move freight, sometimes
referred to as "service elevators," must meet the ASME requirements for
passenger elevators. Examples include elevators in residential or retail
facilities that are regularly used by tenants or customers but that are
also used to move furniture, merchandise, or other freight. Where
provided, they must comply with the Standards.

Freight elevators, on the other hand, are defined by the ASME A17.1 code
as those elevators "used primarily for carrying freight and on which
only the operator and the persons necessary for unloading and loading
the freight are permitted to ride." Freight elevators cannot be used in
lieu of a passenger elevator to provide an accessible route between
stories or mezzanines. Where provided, freight elevators are not
required to comply with the Standards.

##### Can elevator doors close sooner than the minimum opening time specified when users activate door close?

User activation of door close (or automatic operation) cannot reduce the
initial opening time of doors (3 seconds minimum) or the minimum door
signal timing (based on 1.5/ ft/s travel speed for the distance from the
hall call button to car door centerline). When doors automatically
reopen due to a detected obstruction, they can begin to reclose when no
longer obstructed. The 20 second minimum pertains to the length of time
the sensory reopening device remains effective, not necessarily the
length of time doors remain open.

##### Must elevator doors remain open for 20 seconds?

LULA swing doors, private residence elevator doors, and platform lift
gates and doors must remain open for 20 seconds minimum. This does not
apply to the doors of passenger elevators complying with §407 which must
remain fully open for at least 3 seconds in response to a call
(§407.3.5). The opening time is further determined by the travel
distance from hall call buttons and signal timing based on a 1.5 ft/s
travel speed beginning from audible and visible signalization of car
arrival (§407.3.4). Reopening devices must remain effective for 20
seconds minimum, but in reopening, doors do not have to remain open for
this length of time if unobstructed.

##### Are access key, card, or code entry systems permitted in elevators?

Yes, but fixed features of such systems must comply as operable parts.
For example, card readers must be located within accessible reach
ranges. Non-fixed portions, including keys and access cards issued to
users, are not required to comply. (Where use of stairs between levels
served by an elevator is unrestricted, use of the elevator should not be
restricted to key holders.)

##### Can audible signals for an elevator operate only when needed by a passenger who needs them through activation of dedicated "accessibility" control?

No, audible (and visible) signals required for elevators must function
automatically at all times an elevator is operational. Requiring
passengers to manually activate such signals when needed is not
permitted by the ADA Standards.

##### Can hall and in-car signals be displayed horizontally (i.e., side-by-side) instead of vertically (i.e., one above the other)?

Yes, hall signs can be displayed horizontally instead of vertically.
However, with call buttons, the button designating the up direction must
be located above the one indicating the down direction (§407.2.1.4).

##### Are handrails required in elevator cars?

The ADA Standards do not require handrails in elevators cars. If they
are provided, they are not required to comply with requirements in the
ADA Standards for handrails (§403.6, Advisory).

##### Can a more recent edition of the ASME A17.1 Safety Code for Elevators and Escalators (or the ASME A18.1 Safety Standard for Platform Lifts and Stairway Chairlifts) be used instead of the editions referenced in the Standards?

The specific editions of the ASME A17.1 and ASME A18.1 codes referenced
by the ADA Standards are to be followed (although the Access Board
intends to update references to keep them current). Compliance with a
later edition may be possible under the provision for "equivalent
facilitation" (§103) if it is comparable to, or stricter than, the
referenced editions.

#### Platform Lifts

##### Are stairway chairlifts permitted?

No, stairway chairlifts cannot be used where platform lifts are
permitted by the ADA Standards (§206.7) although they are addressed by
the ASME A18.1 Standard. Chairlifts require transfer to a fixed seat
from wheeled mobility aids and thus are not independently usable.
Platform lifts can be equipped with seats, including those that fold,
but they must be located outside the minimum clear area specified for
platforms which are sized to accommodate wheeled mobility aids.

##### Can platform lifts be locked?

The Standards require "unassisted" entry and exit from lifts (§410.1).
Situations in which platform lifts are locked and require users to
request or retrieve a key for operation will not satisfy this
requirement for independent operation. Platform lifts can be locked
during those times when the space or facility they serve is closed.

##### Can lifts be attendant-operated?

Attendant operation, although recognized by the ASME A18.1 Standard, is
expressly prohibited by the ADA Standards. Platform lifts must provide
"unassisted entry and exit from the lift" (§410.1).

##### Can platform lifts be portable or provided after construction as an adaptation?

Platform lifts must be permanent and installed at the time of
construction or alteration with few exceptions. Platform lifts can be
provided after construction only to provide access to raised work
stations in courtrooms (sufficient space and electrical service must be
provided in design to facilitate installation). Only platform lifts
serving temporary structures can be temporary or portable.
