---
title: "Guidance on the International Symbol of Accessibility"
order-number:  100
file: /files/ada/guides/ISA-guidance.pdf
file-description: PDF version of ISA Guidance
redirect_from: 
    - /guidelines-and-standards/buildings-and-sites/about-the-ada-standards/guide-to-the-ada-standards/guidance-on-the-isa/
---
**March 27, 2017**

The U.S. Access Board provides the following guidance on use of the
International Symbol of Accessibility (ISA) under the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Architectural Barriers Act (ABA). This
guidance explains how use of a symbol other than the ISA may impact
compliance with standards issued under the ADA and the ABA.

### The International Symbol of Accessibility (ISA)

{% include imgright-italictextbelow.html
img-file= "isa.JPG"
img-alt= "International Symbol of Accessibility (ISA)"
text= "<strong>ISA</strong> (1968)"
%}

Created in 1968 through a design competition by Rehabilitation
International and adopted by the International Organization for
Standardization (ISO), the ISA has served as a global icon for
accessibility for almost 50 years. The ISO is an independent,
non-governmental organization that represents over 160 national
standard-setting entities and develops voluntary, consensus-based,
international standards. As part of an ISO standard (ISO 7001 Graphic
Symbols -- Public Information Symbols), the ISA reflects considerable
analysis by, and the consensus of, an international collection of
technical experts.

The ISA continues to be recognized worldwide as a symbol identifying
accessible elements and spaces. Standards issued under the ADA and ABA
Standards reference and reproduce the ISA to ensure consistency in the
designation of accessible elements and spaces. Uniform iconography
promotes legibility, especially for people with low vision or cognitive
disabilities. In addition, various codes and standards in the U.S. also
require use of the ISA. They include the International Codes Council's
International Building Code and ICC A117.1 Standard for Accessible and
Usable Buildings and Facilities, the National Fire Protection
Association's NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code and NFPA
170 Standard for Fire Safety and Emergency Symbols, and the Federal
Highway Administration's Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, among others.

### Use of the ISA Under the ADA

The [ADA Standards]({{ site.baseurl }}/ada/) apply nationwide to places of
public accommodation, commercial facilities, and state and local
government facilities. Promulgated by the Department of Justice (28 CFR
Parts 35 and 36) and the Department of Transportation (49 CFR Part 37),
the ADA Standards require use of the ISA to label or provide direction
to certain accessible spaces and elements, including parking spaces,
entrances, toilet and bathing facilities, and check-out aisles (§216 and
§703.7.2.1). In addition, [ADA Standards for Transportation
Vehicles](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&rgn=div5&view=text&node=49:1.0.1.1.28&idno=49)
(49 CFR Part 38) implemented by the Department of Transportation (DOT)
require that the ISA be used to designate accessible vehicles.

A symbol other than the ISA will not comply with the ADA Standards
unless it satisfies the "equivalent facilitation" provision (§103). This
provision allows alternatives to prescribed requirements if they result
in "substantially equivalent or greater accessibility and usability."
The burden of proof in demonstrating equivalent facilitation rests with
the covered entity in the event of a legal challenge. Under DOT's ADA
Standards, certain entities responsible for transportation facilities
and systems, as well as manufacturers of products and vehicles used in
transportation systems, can request a determination of equivalent
facilitation from DOT as outlined in its [ADA
regulations](http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?c=ecfr&SID=d315855e2f2c9f940970f4c191349c12&rgn=div5&view=text&node=49:1.0.1.1.27&idno=49)
(§37.7 and §37.9). If a court --- or DOT, where DOT's ADA Standards are
being applied --- determined that an alternate symbol did not provide
"equivalent facilitation," that symbol would not be permitted.

### Use of the ISA Under the ABA

Standards issued under the ABA apply to facilities designed, built, or
altered with federal funds or leased by federal agencies. The [ABA
Standards]({{ site.baseurl }}/aba/) are
implemented by the Department of Defense, the Department of Housing and
Urban Development, the General Services Administration, and the U.S.
Postal Service. Like the ADA Standards, these standards mandate use of
the ISA to label or provide direction to certain accessible spaces and
elements (§F216 and §703.7.2.1).

Any departure from the ABA Standards, including the referenced ISA,
requires a waiver or modification (§F103). The agencies that implement
the ABA Standards have authority to grant modifications and waivers on a
case-by-case basis where "clearly necessary." Modifications and waivers
are rare and are usually considered only in unique circumstances that
make compliance with certain provisions exceptionally problematic. The
Access Board is responsible for making sure that modifications and
waivers are based on findings of fact and are consistent with the ABA.

### Summary

Use of a symbol other than the ISA is permitted under the ADA Standards
only if it satisfies the equivalent facilitation provision and under the
ABA Standards only if a waiver or modification is issued. Otherwise,
where the ADA or ABA Standards require accessible spaces or elements to
be identified by the ISA, the ISA must be used even where a state or
local code or regulation specifies a different symbol. Those who are
interested in implementing an alternative symbol of accessibility are
encouraged to contact the ISO's [Technical Committee 145 on Graphic
Symbols](http://www.iso.org/iso/iso_technical_committee%3Fcommid%3D52662)
which maintains the graphic symbol standards.
